---
title: "Homeostasis"
layout: page
tags: debug
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
* Discuss the role of homeostasis in healthy functioning
* Contrast negative and positive feedback, giving one physiologic
  example of each mechanism

</div>
Maintaining homeostasis requires that the body continuously monitor its
internal conditions. From body temperature to blood pressure to levels
of certain nutrients, each physiological condition has a particular set
point. A <span data-type="term">set point</span> is the physiological
value around which the normal range fluctuates. A <span
data-type="term">normal range</span> is the restricted set of values
that is optimally healthful and stable. For example, the set point for
normal human body temperature is approximately 37°C (98.6°F)
Physiological parameters, such as body temperature and blood pressure,
tend to fluctuate within a normal range a few degrees above and below
that point. Control centers in the brain play roles in regulating
physiological parameters and keeping them within the normal range. As
the body works to maintain homeostasis, any significant deviation from
the normal range will be resisted and homeostasis restored through a
process called negative feedback. <span data-type="term">Negative
feedback</span> is a mechanism that prevents a physiological response
from going beyond the normal range by reversing the action once the
normal range is exceeded. The maintenance of homeostasis by negative
feedback goes on throughout the body at all times, and an understanding
of negative feedback is thus fundamental to an understanding of human
physiology.

# Negative Feedback

A negative feedback system has three basic components
([\[link\]](#fig-ch01_05_01){: .autogenerated-content}**a**). A <span
data-type="term">sensor</span>, also referred to a receptor, is a
component of a feedback system that monitors a physiological value. This
value is reported to the control center. The <span
data-type="term">control center</span> is the component in a feedback
system that compares the value to the normal range. If the value
deviates too much from the set point, then the control center activates
an effector. An <span data-type="term">effector</span> is the component
in a feedback system that causes a change to reverse the situation and
return the value to the normal range.

![This figure shows three flow charts labeled A, B, and C. Chart A shows a general negative feedback loop. The loop starts with a stimulus. Information about the stimulus is perceived by a sensor which sends that information to a control center. The control center sends a signal to an effector, which then feeds back to the top of the flow chart by inhibiting the stimulus. Part B shows body temperature regulation as an example of negative feedback system. Here, the stimulus is body temperature exceeding 37 degrees Celsius. The sensor is a set of nerve cells in the skin and brain and the control center is the temperature regulatory center of the brain. The effectors are sweat glands throughout the body which inhibit the rising body temperature.](../resources/105_Negative_Feedback_Loops.jpg "In a negative feedback loop, a stimulus&#x2014;a deviation from a set point&#x2014;is resisted through a physiological process that returns the body to homeostasis. (a) A negative feedback loop has four basic parts. (b) Body temperature is regulated by negative feedback. "){: #fig-ch01_05_01 data-media-type="image/jpeg" data-title="Negative Feedback Loop"}

In order to set the system in motion, a stimulus must drive a
physiological parameter beyond its normal range (that is, beyond
homeostasis). This stimulus is “heard” by a specific sensor. For
example, in the control of blood glucose, specific endocrine cells in
the pancreas detect excess glucose (the stimulus) in the bloodstream.
These pancreatic beta cells respond to the increased level of blood
glucose by releasing the hormone insulin into the bloodstream. The
insulin signals skeletal muscle fibers, fat cells (adipocytes), and
liver cells to take up the excess glucose, removing it from the
bloodstream. As glucose concentration in the bloodstream drops, the
decrease in concentration—the actual negative feedback—is detected by
pancreatic alpha cells, and insulin release stops. This prevents blood
sugar levels from continuing to drop below the normal range.

Humans have a similar temperature regulation feedback system that works
by promoting either heat loss or heat gain
([\[link\]](#fig-ch01_05_01){: .autogenerated-content}**b**). When the
brain’s temperature regulation center receives data from the sensors
indicating that the body’s temperature exceeds its normal range, it
stimulates a cluster of brain cells referred to as the “heat-loss
center.” This stimulation has three major effects:

* Blood vessels in the skin begin to dilate allowing more blood from the
  body core to flow to the surface of the skin allowing the heat to
  radiate into the environment.
* As blood flow to the skin increases, sweat glands are activated to
  increase their output. As the sweat evaporates from the skin surface
  into the surrounding air, it takes heat with it.
* The depth of respiration increases, and a person may breathe through
  an open mouth instead of through the nasal passageways. This further
  increases heat loss from the lungs.

In contrast, activation of the brain’s heat-gain center by exposure to
cold reduces blood flow to the skin, and blood returning from the limbs
is diverted into a network of deep veins. This arrangement traps heat
closer to the body core and restricts heat loss. If heat loss is severe,
the brain triggers an increase in random signals to skeletal muscles,
causing them to contract and producing shivering. The muscle
contractions of shivering release heat while using up ATP. The brain
triggers the thyroid gland in the endocrine system to release thyroid
hormone, which increases metabolic activity and heat production in cells
throughout the body. The brain also signals the adrenal glands to
release epinephrine (adrenaline), a hormone that causes the breakdown of
glycogen into glucose, which can be used as an energy source. The
breakdown of glycogen into glucose also results in increased metabolism
and heat production.

<div data-type="note" class="anatomy interactive" data-label="" markdown="1">
<span data-type="media" data-alt="QR Code representing a URL"> ![QR Code
representing a URL](../resources/H2Ocon.png){:
data-media-type="image/png"} </span>
Water concentration in the body is critical for proper functioning. A
person’s body retains very tight control on water levels without
conscious control by the person. Watch this [video][1] to learn more
about water concentration in the body. Which organ has primary control
over the amount of water in the body?

</div>

# Positive Feedback

<span data-type="term">Positive feedback</span> intensifies a change in
the body’s physiological condition rather than reversing it. A deviation
from the normal range results in more change, and the system moves
farther away from the normal range. Positive feedback in the body is
normal only when there is a definite end point. Childbirth and the
body’s response to blood loss are two examples of positive feedback
loops that are normal but are activated only when needed.

Childbirth at full term is an example of a situation in which the
maintenance of the existing body state is not desired. Enormous changes
in the mother’s body are required to expel the baby at the end of
pregnancy. And the events of childbirth, once begun, must progress
rapidly to a conclusion or the life of the mother and the baby are at
risk. The extreme muscular work of labor and delivery are the result of
a positive feedback system ([\[link\]](#fig-ch01_05_02){:
.autogenerated-content}).

![This diagram shows the steps of a positive feedback loop as a series of stepwise arrows looping around a diagram of an infant within the uterus of a pregnant woman. Initially the head of the baby pushes against the cervix, transmitting nerve impulses from the cervix to the brain. Next the brain stimulates the pituitary gland to secrete oxytocin which is carried in the bloodstream to the uterus. Finally, the oxytocin simulates uterine contractions and pushes the baby harder into the cervix. As the head of the baby pushes against the cervix with greater and greater force, the uterine contractions grow stronger and more frequent. This mechanism is a positive feedback loop.](../resources/106_Pregnancy-Positive_Feedback.jpg "Normal childbirth is driven by a positive feedback loop. A positive feedback loop results in a change in the body&#x2019;s status, rather than a return to homeostasis."){: #fig-ch01_05_02 data-media-type="image/jpeg" data-title="Positive Feedback Loop"}

The first contractions of labor (the stimulus) push the baby toward the
cervix (the lowest part of the uterus). The cervix contains
stretch-sensitive nerve cells that monitor the degree of stretching (the
sensors). These nerve cells send messages to the brain, which in turn
causes the pituitary gland at the base of the brain to release the
hormone oxytocin into the bloodstream. Oxytocin causes stronger
contractions of the smooth muscles in of the uterus (the effectors),
pushing the baby further down the birth canal. This causes even greater
stretching of the cervix. The cycle of stretching, oxytocin release, and
increasingly more forceful contractions stops only when the baby is
born. At this point, the stretching of the cervix halts, stopping the
release of oxytocin.

A second example of positive feedback centers on reversing extreme
damage to the body. Following a penetrating wound, the most immediate
threat is excessive blood loss. Less blood circulating means reduced
blood pressure and reduced perfusion (penetration of blood) to the brain
and other vital organs. If perfusion is severely reduced, vital organs
will shut down and the person will die. The body responds to this
potential catastrophe by releasing substances in the injured blood
vessel wall that begin the process of blood clotting. As each step of
clotting occurs, it stimulates the release of more clotting substances.
This accelerates the processes of clotting and sealing off the damaged
area. Clotting is contained in a local area based on the tightly
controlled availability of clotting proteins. This is an adaptive,
life-saving cascade of events.

# Chapter Review

Homeostasis is the activity of cells throughout the body to maintain the
physiological state within a narrow range that is compatible with life.
Homeostasis is regulated by negative feedback loops and, much less
frequently, by positive feedback loops. Both have the same components of
a stimulus, sensor, control center, and effector; however, negative
feedback loops work to prevent an excessive response to the stimulus,
whereas positive feedback loops intensify the response until an end
point is reached.

# Interactive Link Questions

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Water concentration in the body is critical for proper functioning. A
person’s body retains very tight control on water levels without
conscious control by the person. Watch this [video][1] to learn more
about water concentration in the body. Which organ has primary control
over the amount of water in the body?

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
The kidneys.

</div>
</div>

# Review Questions

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
After you eat lunch, nerve cells in your stomach respond to the
distension (the stimulus) resulting from the food. They relay this
information to ________.

1.  a control center
2.  a set point
3.  effectors
4.  sensors
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
A

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Stimulation of the heat-loss center causes ________.

1.  blood vessels in the skin to constrict
2.  breathing to become slow and shallow
3.  sweat glands to increase their output
4.  All of the above
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
C

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Which of the following is an example of a normal physiologic process
that uses a positive feedback loop?

1.  blood pressure regulation
2.  childbirth
3.  regulation of fluid balance
4.  temperature regulation
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
B

</div>
</div>

# Critical Thinking Questions

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Identify the four components of a negative feedback loop and explain
what would happen if secretion of a body chemical controlled by a
negative feedback system became too great.

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
The four components of a negative feedback loop are: stimulus, sensor,
control center, and effector. If too great a quantity of the chemical
were excreted, sensors would activate a control center, which would in
turn activate an effector. In this case, the effector (the secreting
cells) would be adjusted downward.

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What regulatory processes would your body use if you were trapped by a
blizzard in an unheated, uninsulated cabin in the woods?

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
Any prolonged exposure to extreme cold would activate the brain’s
heat-gain center. This would reduce blood flow to your skin, and shunt
blood returning from your limbs away from the digits and into a network
of deep veins. Your brain’s heat-gain center would also increase your
muscle contraction, causing you to shiver. This increases the energy
consumption of skeletal muscle and generates more heat. Your body would
also produce thyroid hormone and epinephrine, chemicals that promote
increased metabolism and heat production.

</div>
</div>



[1]: http://openstaxcollege.org/l/H2Ocon
