---
title: Requirements for Human Life
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Discuss the role of oxygen and nutrients in maintaining human survival
* Explain why extreme heat and extreme cold threaten human survival
* Explain how the pressure exerted by gases and fluids influences human
  survival

</div>
Humans have been adapting to life on Earth for at least the past 200,000
years. Earth and its atmosphere have provided us with air to breathe,
water to drink, and food to eat, but these are not the only requirements
for survival. Although you may rarely think about it, you also cannot
live outside of a certain range of temperature and pressure that the
surface of our planet and its atmosphere provides. The next sections
explore these four requirements of life.
{: #fs-id1520530}

<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2081426" markdown="1">
# Oxygen
{: data-type="title"}

Atmospheric air is only about 20 percent oxygen, but that oxygen is a
key component of the chemical reactions that keep the body alive,
including the reactions that produce ATP. Brain cells are especially
sensitive to lack of oxygen because of their requirement for a
high-and-steady production of ATP. Brain damage is likely within five
minutes without oxygen, and death is likely within ten minutes.
{: #fs-id2396763}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2395044" markdown="1">
# Nutrients
{: data-type="title"}

A <span data-type="term">nutrient</span> is a substance in foods and
beverages that is essential to human survival. The three basic classes
of nutrients are water, the energy-yielding and body-building nutrients,
and the micronutrients (vitamins and minerals).
{: #fs-id2532130}

The most critical nutrient is water. Depending on the environmental
temperature and our state of health, we may be able to survive for only
a few days without water. The body’s functional chemicals are dissolved
and transported in water, and the chemical reactions of life take place
in water. Moreover, water is the largest component of cells, blood, and
the fluid between cells, and water makes up about 70 percent of an
adult’s body mass. Water also helps regulate our internal temperature
and cushions, protects, and lubricates joints and many other body
structures.
{: #fs-id1250210}

The energy-yielding nutrients are primarily carbohydrates and lipids,
while proteins mainly supply the amino acids that are the building
blocks of the body itself. You ingest these in plant and animal foods
and beverages, and the digestive system breaks them down into molecules
small enough to be absorbed. The breakdown products of carbohydrates and
lipids can then be used in the metabolic processes that convert them to
ATP. Although you might feel as if you are starving after missing a
single meal, you can survive without consuming the energy-yielding
nutrients for at least several weeks.
{: #fs-id2269270}

Water and the energy-yielding nutrients are also referred to as
macronutrients because the body needs them in large amounts. In
contrast, micronutrients are vitamins and minerals. These elements and
compounds participate in many essential chemical reactions and
processes, such nerve impulses, and some, such as calcium, also
contribute to the body’s structure. Your body can store some of the
micronutrients in its tissues, and draw on those reserves if you fail to
consume them in your diet for a few days or weeks. Some others
micronutrients, such as vitamin C and most of the B vitamins, are
water-soluble and cannot be stored, so you need to consume them every
day or two.
{: #fs-id1841065}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2352651" markdown="1">
# Narrow Range of Temperature
{: data-type="title"}

You have probably seen news stories about athletes who died of heat
stroke, or hikers who died of exposure to cold. Such deaths occur
because the chemical reactions upon which the body depends can only take
place within a narrow range of body temperature, from just below to just
above 37°C (98.6°F). When body temperature rises well above or drops
well below normal, certain proteins (enzymes) that facilitate chemical
reactions lose their normal structure and their ability to function and
the chemical reactions of metabolism cannot proceed.
{: #fs-id1758474}

That said, the body can respond effectively to short-term exposure to
heat ([\[link\]](#fig-ch01_04_01){: .autogenerated-content}) or cold.
One of the body’s responses to heat is, of course, sweating. As sweat
evaporates from skin, it removes some thermal energy from the body,
cooling it. Adequate water (from the extracellular fluid in the body) is
necessary to produce sweat, so adequate fluid intake is essential to
balance that loss during the sweat response. Not surprisingly, the sweat
response is much less effective in a humid environment because the air
is already saturated with water. Thus, the sweat on the skin’s surface
is not able to evaporate, and internal body temperature can get
dangerously high.
{: #fs-id1688531}

<figure id="fig-ch01_04_01">
<div data-type="title">
Extreme Heat
</div>
<figcaption>
Humans adapt to some degree to repeated exposure to high temperatures.
(credit: McKay Savage/flickr)
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1882111" data-alt="This photo shows two
white-clad men riding camels through a sparse desert. Two canvas tents
are visible in the background."> ![This photo shows two white-clad men
riding camels through a sparse desert. Two canvas tents are visible in
the background.](../resources/01_06_Extreme_Heat.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="420"} </span>
</figure>
The body can also respond effectively to short-term exposure to cold.
One response to cold is shivering, which is random muscle movement that
generates heat. Another response is increased breakdown of stored energy
to generate heat. When that energy reserve is depleted, however, and the
core temperature begins to drop significantly, red blood cells will lose
their ability to give up oxygen, denying the brain of this critical
component of ATP production. This lack of oxygen can cause confusion,
lethargy, and eventually loss of consciousness and death. The body
responds to cold by reducing blood circulation to the extremities, the
hands and feet, in order to prevent blood from cooling there and so that
the body’s core can stay warm. Even when core body temperature remains
stable, however, tissues exposed to severe cold, especially the fingers
and toes, can develop frostbite when blood flow to the extremities has
been much reduced. This form of tissue damage can be permanent and lead
to gangrene, requiring amputation of the affected region.
{: #fs-id2012017}

<div data-type="note" id="fs-id1977888" class="anatomy everyday" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Everyday Connection
</div>
<span data-type="title">Controlled Hypothermia</span> As you have
learned, the body continuously engages in coordinated physiological
processes to maintain a stable temperature. In some cases, however,
overriding this system can be useful, or even life-saving. Hypothermia
is the clinical term for an abnormally low body temperature (hypo- =
“below” or “under”). Controlled hypothermia is clinically induced
hypothermia performed in order to reduce the metabolic rate of an organ
or of a person’s entire body.
{: #fs-id1902785}

Controlled hypothermia often is used, for example, during open-heart
surgery because it decreases the metabolic needs of the brain, heart,
and other organs, reducing the risk of damage to them. When controlled
hypothermia is used clinically, the patient is given medication to
prevent shivering. The body is then cooled to 25–32°C (79–89°F). The
heart is stopped and an external heart-lung pump maintains circulation
to the patient’s body. The heart is cooled further and is maintained at
a temperature below 15°C (60°F) for the duration of the surgery. This
very cold temperature helps the heart muscle to tolerate its lack of
blood supply during the surgery.
{: #fs-id2471181}

Some emergency department physicians use controlled hypothermia to
reduce damage to the heart in patients who have suffered a cardiac
arrest. In the emergency department, the physician induces coma and
lowers the patient’s body temperature to approximately 91 degrees. This
condition, which is maintained for 24 hours, slows the patient’s
metabolic rate. Because the patient’s organs require less blood to
function, the heart’s workload is reduced.
{: #fs-id2463653}

</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1618558" markdown="1">
# Narrow Range of Atmospheric Pressure
{: data-type="title"}

<span data-type="term">Pressure</span> is a force exerted by a substance
that is in contact with another substance. Atmospheric pressure is
pressure exerted by the mixture of gases (primarily nitrogen and oxygen)
in the Earth’s atmosphere. Although you may not perceive it, atmospheric
pressure is constantly pressing down on your body. This pressure keeps
gases within your body, such as the gaseous nitrogen in body fluids,
dissolved. If you were suddenly ejected from a space ship above Earth’s
atmosphere, you would go from a situation of normal pressure to one of
very low pressure. The pressure of the nitrogen gas in your blood would
be much higher than the pressure of nitrogen in the space surrounding
your body. As a result, the nitrogen gas in your blood would expand,
forming bubbles that could block blood vessels and even cause cells to
break apart.
{: #fs-id2567469}

Atmospheric pressure does more than just keep blood gases dissolved.
Your ability to breathe—that is, to take in oxygen and release carbon
dioxide—also depends upon a precise atmospheric pressure. Altitude
sickness occurs in part because the atmosphere at high altitudes exerts
less pressure, reducing the exchange of these gases, and causing
shortness of breath, confusion, headache, lethargy, and nausea. Mountain
climbers carry oxygen to reduce the effects of both low oxygen levels
and low barometric pressure at higher altitudes
([\[link\]](#fig-ch01_04_02){: .autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id1648023}

<figure id="fig-ch01_04_02">
<div data-type="title">
Harsh Conditions
</div>
<figcaption>
Climbers on Mount Everest must accommodate extreme cold, low oxygen
levels, and low barometric pressure in an environment hostile to human
life. (credit: Melanie Ko/flickr)
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2141248" data-alt="This photo shows
Mount Everest as seen from a distance. It is a large, pyramid-shaped,
craggy peak with many smaller snow-covered peaks in the foreground. The
peak of Mount Everest is partially occluded by clouds."> ![This photo
shows Mount Everest as seen from a distance. It is a large,
pyramid-shaped, craggy peak with many smaller snow-covered peaks in the
foreground. The peak of Mount Everest is partially occluded by
clouds.](../resources/01_07_Harsh_Conditions.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="380"} </span>
</figure>
<div data-type="note" id="fs-id2227604" class="anatomy homeostatic" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Homeostatic Imbalances
</div>
<span data-type="title">Decompression Sickness</span> Decompression
sickness (DCS) is a condition in which gases dissolved in the blood or
in other body tissues are no longer dissolved following a reduction in
pressure on the body. This condition affects underwater divers who
surface from a deep dive too quickly, and it can affect pilots flying at
high altitudes in planes with unpressurized cabins. Divers often call
this condition “the bends,” a reference to joint pain that is a symptom
of DCS.
{: #fs-id2104133}

In all cases, DCS is brought about by a reduction in barometric
pressure. At high altitude, barometric pressure is much less than on
Earth’s surface because pressure is produced by the weight of the column
of air above the body pressing down on the body. The very great
pressures on divers in deep water are likewise from the weight of a
column of water pressing down on the body. For divers, DCS occurs at
normal barometric pressure (at sea level), but it is brought on by the
relatively rapid decrease of pressure as divers rise from the high
pressure conditions of deep water to the now low, by comparison,
pressure at sea level. Not surprisingly, diving in deep mountain lakes,
where barometric pressure at the surface of the lake is less than that
at sea level is more likely to result in DCS than diving in water at sea
level.
{: #fs-id2153756}

In DCS, gases dissolved in the blood (primarily nitrogen) come rapidly
out of solution, forming bubbles in the blood and in other body tissues.
This occurs because when pressure of a gas over a liquid is decreased,
the amount of gas that can remain dissolved in the liquid also is
decreased. It is air pressure that keeps your normal blood gases
dissolved in the blood. When pressure is reduced, less gas remains
dissolved. You have seen this in effect when you open a carbonated
drink. Removing the seal of the bottle reduces the pressure of the gas
over the liquid. This in turn causes bubbles as dissolved gases (in this
case, carbon dioxide) come out of solution in the liquid.
{: #fs-id1884492}

The most common symptoms of DCS are pain in the joints, with headache
and disturbances of vision occurring in 10 percent to 15 percent of
cases. Left untreated, very severe DCS can result in death. Immediate
treatment is with pure oxygen. The affected person is then moved into a
hyperbaric chamber. A hyperbaric chamber is a reinforced, closed chamber
that is pressurized to greater than atmospheric pressure. It treats DCS
by repressurizing the body so that pressure can then be removed much
more gradually. Because the hyperbaric chamber introduces oxygen to the
body at high pressure, it increases the concentration of oxygen in the
blood. This has the effect of replacing some of the nitrogen in the
blood with oxygen, which is easier to tolerate out of solution.
{: #fs-id2431360}

</div>
The dynamic pressure of body fluids is also important to human survival.
For example, blood pressure, which is the pressure exerted by blood as
it flows within blood vessels, must be great enough to enable blood to
reach all body tissues, and yet low enough to ensure that the delicate
blood vessels can withstand the friction and force of the pulsating flow
of pressurized blood.
{: #fs-id2097735}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2813764" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

Humans cannot survive for more than a few minutes without oxygen, for
more than several days without water, and for more than several weeks
without carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, vitamins, and minerals.
Although the body can respond to high temperatures by sweating and to
low temperatures by shivering and increased fuel consumption, long-term
exposure to extreme heat and cold is not compatible with survival. The
body requires a precise atmospheric pressure to maintain its gases in
solution and to facilitate respiration—the intake of oxygen and the
release of carbon dioxide. Humans also require blood pressure high
enough to ensure that blood reaches all body tissues but low enough to
avoid damage to blood vessels.
{: #fs-id2661562}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2023410" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2303679">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2144727" markdown="1">
Humans have the most urgent need for a continuous supply of ________.
{: #fs-id1469266}

1.  food
2.  nitrogen
3.  oxygen
4.  water
{: #fs-id1845348 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2242359" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id1489946}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2378896">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2524700" markdown="1">
Which of the following statements about nutrients is true?
{: #fs-id2322385}

1.  All classes of nutrients are essential to human survival.
2.  Because the body cannot store any micronutrients, they need to be
    consumed nearly every day.
3.  Carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins are micronutrients.
4.  Macronutrients are vitamins and minerals.
{: #fs-id1357708 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2843981" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id1962359}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2570988">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1382103" markdown="1">
C.J. is stuck in her car during a bitterly cold blizzard. Her body
responds to the cold by ________.
{: #fs-id1747855}

1.  increasing the blood to her hands and feet
2.  becoming lethargic to conserve heat
3.  breaking down stored energy
4.  significantly increasing blood oxygen levels
{: #fs-id2627097 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2430032" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id1896932}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1849856" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2443247">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1844958" markdown="1">
When you open a bottle of sparkling water, the carbon dioxide gas in the
bottle form bubbles. If the bottle is left open, the water will
eventually “go flat.” Explain these phenomena in terms of atmospheric
pressure.
{: #fs-id2381959}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2874960" data-label="" markdown="1">
In a sealed bottle of sparkling water, carbon dioxide gas is kept
dissolved in the water under a very high pressure. When you open the
bottle, the pressure of the gas above the liquid changes from
artificially high to normal atmospheric pressure. The dissolved carbon
dioxide gas expands, and rises in bubbles to the surface. When a bottle
of sparkling water is left open, it eventually goes flat because its
gases continue to move out of solution until the pressure in the water
is approximately equal to atmospheric pressure.
{: #fs-id2293179}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2662563">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2009732" markdown="1">
On his midsummer trek through the desert, Josh ran out of water. Why is
this particularly dangerous?
{: #fs-id2321216}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2158747" data-label="" markdown="1">
The primary way that the body responds to high environmental heat is by
sweating; however, sweating requires water, which comes from body
fluids, including blood plasma. If Josh becomes dehydrated, he will be
unable to sweat adequately to cool his body, and he will be at risk for
heat stroke as his blood pressure drops too much from the loss of water
from the blood plasma.
{: #fs-id2637099}

</div>
</div>
</section>



