---
title: Introduction
layout: page
---

<?cnx.eoc
  class="summary" title="Chapter Review"?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="interactive-exercise" title="Interactive Link Questions"?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="multiple-choice" title="Review Questions" ?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="free-response" title="Critical Thinking Questions"?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class=&#8221;references&#8221; title=&#8221;References&#8221;?>

<figure id="fig-ch05_00_01" class="splash">
<figcaption>
Your skin is a vital part of your life and appearance (a–d). Some people
choose to embellish it with tattoos (a), makeup (b), and even piercings
(c). (credit a: Steve Teo; credit b: “spaceodissey”/flickr; credit c:
Mark/flickr; credit d: Lisa Schaffer)
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1211977" data-alt="Photo A shows a
person getting a tattoo on the foot. Photo B shows a woman getting her
eyebrows groomed. Photo C shows a person&#x2019;s ear, with five
earrings in the upper part and one in the lobe. Photo D shows a man and
a boy shaving their faces."> ![Photo A shows a person getting a tattoo
on the foot. Photo B shows a woman getting her eyebrows groomed. Photo C
shows a person&#x2019;s ear, with five earrings in the upper part and
one in the lobe. Photo D shows a man and a boy shaving their
faces.](../resources/500_Splash_Image.jpg){: data-media-type="image/jpg"
width="600"} </span>
</figure>
<div data-type="note" id="eip-637" class="chapter-objectives" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Chapter Objectives
</div>
After studying the chapter, you will be able to:
{: #eip-id1171735384942}

* Describe the integumentary system and the role it plays in homeostasis
* Describe the layers of the skin and the functions of each layer
* Describe the accessory structures of the skin and the functions of
  each
* Describe the changes that occur in the integumentary system during the
  aging process
* Discuss several common diseases, disorders, and injuries that affect
  the integumentary system
* Explain treatments for some common diseases, disorders, and injuries
  of the integumentary system
{: #eip-id1171731410480}

</div>
What do you think when you look at your skin in the mirror? Do you think
about covering it with makeup, adding a tattoo, or maybe a body
piercing? Or do you think about the fact that the skin belongs to one of
the body’s most essential and dynamic systems: the integumentary system?
The integumentary system refers to the skin and its accessory
structures, and it is responsible for much more than simply lending to
your outward appearance. In the adult human body, the skin makes up
about 16 percent of body weight and covers an area of 1.5 to 2
m<sup>2</sup>. In fact, the skin and accessory structures are the
largest organ system in the human body. As such, the skin protects your
inner organs and it is in need of daily care and protection to maintain
its health. This chapter will introduce the structure and functions of
the integumentary system, as well as some of the diseases, disorders,
and injuries that can affect this system.
{: #fs-id1506162}




