---
title: "Accessory Structures of the Skin"
layout: page
tags: debug
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
* Identify the accessory structures of the skin
* Describe the structure and function of hair and nails
* Describe the structure and function of sweat glands and sebaceous
  glands

</div>
Accessory structures of the skin include hair, nails, sweat glands, and
sebaceous glands. These structures embryologically originate from the
epidermis and can extend down through the dermis into the hypodermis.

# Hair

<span data-type="term">Hair</span> is a keratinous filament growing out
of the epidermis. It is primarily made of dead, keratinized cells.
Strands of hair originate in an epidermal penetration of the dermis
called the <span data-type="term">hair follicle</span>. The <span
data-type="term">hair shaft</span> is the part of the hair not anchored
to the follicle, and much of this is exposed at the skin’s surface. The
rest of the hair, which is anchored in the follicle, lies below the
surface of the skin and is referred to as the <span
data-type="term">hair root</span>. The hair root ends deep in the dermis
at the <span data-type="term">hair bulb</span>, and includes a layer of
mitotically active basal cells called the <span data-type="term">hair
matrix</span>. The hair bulb surrounds the <span data-type="term">hair
papilla</span>, which is made of connective tissue and contains blood
capillaries and nerve endings from the dermis
([\[link\]](#fig-ch05_02_01){: .autogenerated-content}).

![This diagram shows a cross section of the skin containing a hair follicle. The follicle is teardrop shaped. Its enlarged base, labeled the hair bulb, is embedded in the hypodermis. The outermost layer of the follicle is the epidermis, which invaginates from the skin surface to envelope the follicle. Within the epidermis is the outer root sheath, which is only present on the hair bulb. It does not extend up the shaft of the hair. Within the outer root sheath is the inner root sheath. The inner root sheath extends about half of the way up the hair shaft, ending midway through the dermis. The hair matrix is the innermost layer. The hair matrix surrounds the bottom of the hair shaft where it is embedded within the hair bulb. The hair shaft, in itself, contains three layers: the outermost cuticle, a middle layer called the cortex, and an innermost layer called the medulla.](../resources/506_Hair.jpg " Hair follicles originate in the epidermis and have many different parts."){: #fig-ch05_02_01 data-media-type="image/jpg" data-title="Hair"}

Just as the basal layer of the epidermis forms the layers of epidermis
that get pushed to the surface as the dead skin on the surface sheds,
the basal cells of the hair bulb divide and push cells outward in the
hair root and shaft as the hair grows. The <span
data-type="term">medulla</span> forms the central core of the hair,
which is surrounded by the <span data-type="term">cortex</span>, a layer
of compressed, keratinized cells that is covered by an outer layer of
very hard, keratinized cells known as the <span
data-type="term">cuticle</span>. These layers are depicted in a
longitudinal cross-section of the hair follicle
([\[link\]](#fig-ch05_02_02){: .autogenerated-content}), although not
all hair has a medullary layer. Hair texture (straight, curly) is
determined by the shape and structure of the cortex, and to the extent
that it is present, the medulla. The shape and structure of these layers
are, in turn, determined by the shape of the hair follicle. Hair growth
begins with the production of keratinocytes by the basal cells of the
hair bulb. As new cells are deposited at the hair bulb, the hair shaft
is pushed through the follicle toward the surface. Keratinization is
completed as the cells are pushed to the skin surface to form the shaft
of hair that is externally visible. The external hair is completely dead
and composed entirely of keratin. For this reason, our hair does not
have sensation. Furthermore, you can cut your hair or shave without
damaging the hair structure because the cut is superficial. Most
chemical hair removers also act superficially; however, electrolysis and
yanking both attempt to destroy the hair bulb so hair cannot grow.

![This micrograph is of the base of a hair follicle. The protruding hair is largely transparent, with only its dark outline visible. The inner root sheath is visible surrounding the very bottom of the hair as a circle of cells with dark-staining nuclei. The inner sheath extends up the hair shaft. The outer root sheath is much thicker than the inner root sheath, consisting of a large oval of lighter staining cells. The oval surrounds the bottom of the hair and extends into the hypodermis.](../resources/511_Hair_Follicle.jpg " The slide shows a cross-section of a hair follicle. Basal cells of the hair matrix in the center differentiate into cells of the inner root sheath. Basal cells at the base of the hair root form the outer root sheath. LM &#xD7; 4. (credit: modification of work by &#x201C;kilbad&#x201D;/Wikimedia Commons)"){: #fig-ch05_02_02 data-media-type="image/jpg" data-title="Hair Follicle"}

The wall of the hair follicle is made of three concentric layers of
cells. The cells of the <span data-type="term">internal root
sheath</span> surround the root of the growing hair and extend just up
to the hair shaft. They are derived from the basal cells of the hair
matrix. The <span data-type="term">external root sheath</span>, which is
an extension of the epidermis, encloses the hair root. It is made of
basal cells at the base of the hair root and tends to be more keratinous
in the upper regions. The <span data-type="term">glassy membrane</span>
is a thick, clear connective tissue sheath covering the hair root,
connecting it to the tissue of the dermis.

<div data-type="note" class="anatomy interactive" data-label="" markdown="1">
<span data-type="media" data-alt="QR Code representing a URL"> ![QR Code
representing a URL](../resources/follicle.png){:
data-media-type="image/png"} </span>
The hair follicle is made of multiple layers of cells that form from
basal cells in the hair matrix and the hair root. Cells of the hair
matrix divide and differentiate to form the layers of the hair. Watch
this [video][1] to learn more about hair follicles.

</div>
Hair serves a variety of functions, including protection, sensory input,
thermoregulation, and communication. For example, hair on the head
protects the skull from the sun. The hair in the nose and ears, and
around the eyes (eyelashes) defends the body by trapping and excluding
dust particles that may contain allergens and microbes. Hair of the
eyebrows prevents sweat and other particles from dripping into and
bothering the eyes. Hair also has a sensory function due to sensory
innervation by a hair root plexus surrounding the base of each hair
follicle. Hair is extremely sensitive to air movement or other
disturbances in the environment, much more so than the skin surface.
This feature is also useful for the detection of the presence of insects
or other potentially damaging substances on the skin surface. Each hair
root is connected to a smooth muscle called the <span
data-type="term">arrector pili</span> that contracts in response to
nerve signals from the sympathetic nervous system, making the external
hair shaft “stand up.” The primary purpose for this is to trap a layer
of air to add insulation. This is visible in humans as goose bumps and
even more obvious in animals, such as when a frightened cat raises its
fur. Of course, this is much more obvious in organisms with a heavier
coat than most humans, such as dogs and cats.

## Hair Growth

Hair grows and is eventually shed and replaced by new hair. This occurs
in three phases. The first is the <span data-type="term">anagen</span>
phase, during which cells divide rapidly at the root of the hair,
pushing the hair shaft up and out. The length of this phase is measured
in years, typically from 2 to 7 years. The <span
data-type="term">catagen</span> phase lasts only 2 to 3 weeks, and marks
a transition from the hair follicle’s active growth. Finally, during the
<span data-type="term">telogen</span> phase, the hair follicle is at
rest and no new growth occurs. At the end of this phase, which lasts
about 2 to 4 months, another anagen phase begins. The basal cells in the
hair matrix then produce a new hair follicle, which pushes the old hair
out as the growth cycle repeats itself. Hair typically grows at the rate
of 0.3 mm per day during the anagen phase. On average, 50 hairs are lost
and replaced per day. Hair loss occurs if there is more hair shed than
what is replaced and can happen due to hormonal or dietary changes. Hair
loss can also result from the aging process, or the influence of
hormones.

## Hair Color

Similar to the skin, hair gets its color from the pigment melanin,
produced by melanocytes in the hair papilla. Different hair color
results from differences in the type of melanin, which is genetically
determined. As a person ages, the melanin production decreases, and hair
tends to lose its color and becomes gray and/or white.

# Nails

The nail bed is a specialized structure of the epidermis that is found
at the tips of our fingers and toes. The <span data-type="term">nail
body</span> is formed on the <span data-type="term">nail bed</span>, and
protects the tips of our fingers and toes as they are the farthest
extremities and the parts of the body that experience the maximum
mechanical stress ([\[link\]](#fig-ch05_02_03){:
.autogenerated-content}). In addition, the nail body forms a
back-support for picking up small objects with the fingers. The nail
body is composed of densely packed dead keratinocytes. The epidermis in
this part of the body has evolved a specialized structure upon which
nails can form. The nail body forms at the <span data-type="term">nail
root</span>, which has a matrix of proliferating cells from the stratum
basale that enables the nail to grow continuously. The lateral <span
data-type="term">nail fold</span> overlaps the nail on the sides,
helping to anchor the nail body. The nail fold that meets the proximal
end of the nail body forms the <span data-type="term">nail
cuticle</span>, also called the <span
data-type="term">eponychium</span>. The nail bed is rich in blood
vessels, making it appear pink, except at the base, where a thick layer
of epithelium over the nail matrix forms a crescent-shaped region called
the <span data-type="term">lunula</span> (the “little moon”). The area
beneath the free edge of the nail, furthest from the cuticle, is called
the <span data-type="term">hyponychium</span>. It consists of a
thickened layer of stratum corneum.

![These two images show anatomy of the fingernail region. The top image shows a dorsal view of a finger. The proximal nail fold is the part underneath where the skin of the finger connects with the edge of the nail. The eponychium is a thin, pink layer between the white proximal edge of the nail (the lunula), and the edge of the finger skin. The lunula appears as a crescent-shaped white area at the proximal edge of the pink-shaded nail. The lateral nail folds are where the sides of the nail contact the finger skin. The distal edge of the nail is white and is called the free edge. An arrow indicates that the nail grows distally out from the proximal nail fold. The lower image shows a lateral view of the nail bed anatomy. In this view, one can see how the edge of the nail is located just proximal to the nail fold. This end of the nail, from which the nail grows, is called the nail root.](../resources/507_Nails.jpg " The nail is an accessory structure of the integumentary system."){: #fig-ch05_02_03 data-media-type="image/jpg" data-title="Nails"}

<div data-type="note" class="anatomy interactive" data-label="" markdown="1">
<span data-type="media" data-alt="QR Code representing a URL"> ![QR Code
representing a URL](../resources/nails.png){:
data-media-type="image/png"} </span>
Nails are accessory structures of the integumentary system. Visit this
[link][2] to learn more about the origin and growth of fingernails.

</div>

# Sweat Glands

When the body becomes warm, <span data-type="term">sudoriferous
glands</span> produce sweat to cool the body. Sweat glands develop from
epidermal projections into the dermis and are classified as merocrine
glands; that is, the secretions are excreted by exocytosis through a
duct without affecting the cells of the gland. There are two types of
sweat glands, each secreting slightly different products.

An <span data-type="term">eccrine sweat gland</span> is type of gland
that produces a hypotonic sweat for thermoregulation. These glands are
found all over the skin’s surface, but are especially abundant on the
palms of the hand, the soles of the feet, and the forehead
([\[link\]](#fig-ch05_02_04){: .autogenerated-content}). They are coiled
glands lying deep in the dermis, with the duct rising up to a pore on
the skin surface, where the sweat is released. This type of sweat,
released by exocytosis, is hypotonic and composed mostly of water, with
some salt, antibodies, traces of metabolic waste, and dermicidin, an
antimicrobial peptide. Eccrine glands are a primary component of
thermoregulation in humans and thus help to maintain homeostasis.

![This diagram shows an eccrine sweat gland embedded in a cross section of skin tissue. The eccrine sweat gland is a bundle of white tubes embedded in the dermis. A single white tube travels up from the bundle and opens on to the surface of the epidermis. The opening is called a pore. There are several pores on the small block of skin portrayed in this diagram.](../resources/508_Eccrine_gland.jpg " Eccrine glands are coiled glands in the dermis that release sweat that is mostly water."){: #fig-ch05_02_04 data-media-type="image/jpg" data-title="Eccrine Gland"}

An <span data-type="term">apocrine sweat gland</span> is usually
associated with hair follicles in densely hairy areas, such as armpits
and genital regions. Apocrine sweat glands are larger than eccrine sweat
glands and lie deeper in the dermis, sometimes even reaching the
hypodermis, with the duct normally emptying into the hair follicle. In
addition to water and salts, apocrine sweat includes organic compounds
that make the sweat thicker and subject to bacterial decomposition and
subsequent smell. The release of this sweat is under both nervous and
hormonal control, and plays a role in the poorly understood human
pheromone response. Most commercial antiperspirants use an
aluminum-based compound as their primary active ingredient to stop
sweat. When the antiperspirant enters the sweat gland duct, the
aluminum-based compounds precipitate due to a change in pH and form a
physical block in the duct, which prevents sweat from coming out of the
pore.

<div data-type="note" class="anatomy interactive" data-label="" markdown="1">
<span data-type="media" data-alt="QR Code representing a URL"> ![QR Code
representing a URL](../resources/sweating.png){:
data-media-type="image/png"} </span>
Sweating regulates body temperature. The composition of the sweat
determines whether body odor is a byproduct of sweating. Visit this
[link][3] to learn more about sweating and body odor.

</div>

# Sebaceous Glands

A <span data-type="term">sebaceous gland</span> is a type of oil gland
that is found all over the body and helps to lubricate and waterproof
the skin and hair. Most sebaceous glands are associated with hair
follicles. They generate and excrete <span
data-type="term">sebum</span>, a mixture of lipids, onto the skin
surface, thereby naturally lubricating the dry and dead layer of
keratinized cells of the stratum corneum, keeping it pliable. The fatty
acids of sebum also have antibacterial properties, and prevent water
loss from the skin in low-humidity environments. The secretion of sebum
is stimulated by hormones, many of which do not become active until
puberty. Thus, sebaceous glands are relatively inactive during
childhood.

# Chapter Review

Accessory structures of the skin include hair, nails, sweat glands, and
sebaceous glands. Hair is made of dead keratinized cells, and gets its
color from melanin pigments. Nails, also made of dead keratinized cells,
protect the extremities of our fingers and toes from mechanical damage.
Sweat glands and sebaceous glands produce sweat and sebum, respectively.
Each of these fluids has a role to play in maintaining homeostasis.
Sweat cools the body surface when it gets overheated and helps excrete
small amounts of metabolic waste. Sebum acts as a natural moisturizer
and keeps the dead, flaky, outer keratin layer healthy.

# Review Questions

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
In response to stimuli from the sympathetic nervous system, the arrector
pili ________.

1.  are glands on the skin surface
2.  can lead to excessive sweating
3.  are responsible for goose bumps
4.  secrete sebum
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
C

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
The hair matrix contains ________.

1.  the hair follicle
2.  the hair shaft
3.  the glassy membrane
4.  a layer of basal cells
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
D

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Eccrine sweat glands ________.

1.  are present on hair
2.  are present in the skin throughout the body and produce watery sweat
3.  produce sebum
4.  act as a moisturizer
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
B

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Sebaceous glands ________.

1.  are a type of sweat gland
2.  are associated with hair follicles
3.  may function in response to touch
4.  release a watery solution of salt and metabolic waste
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
B

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Similar to the hair, nails grow continuously throughout our lives. Which
of the following is furthest from the nail growth center?

1.  nail bed
2.  hyponychium
3.  nail root
4.  eponychium
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
B

</div>
</div>

# Critical Thinking Questions

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Explain the differences between eccrine and apocrine sweat glands.

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
Eccrine sweat glands are all over the body, especially the forehead and
palms of the hand. They release a watery sweat, mixed with some
metabolic waste and antibodies. Apocrine glands are associated with hair
follicles. They are larger than eccrine sweat glands and lie deeper in
the dermis, sometimes even reaching the hypodermis. They release a
thicker sweat that is often decomposed by bacteria on the skin,
resulting in an unpleasant odor.

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Describe the structure and composition of nails.

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
Nails are composed of densely packed dead keratinocytes. They protect
the fingers and toes from mechanical stress. The nail body is formed on
the nail bed, which is at the nail root. Nail folds, folds of skin that
overlap the nail on its side, secure the nail to the body. The
crescent-shaped region at the base of the nail is the lunula.

</div>
</div>



[1]: http://openstaxcollege.org/l/follicle
[2]: http://openstaxcollege.org/l/nails
[3]: http://openstaxcollege.org/l/sweating
