---
title: Chemical Reactions
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Distinguish between kinetic and potential energy, and between
  exergonic and endergonic chemical reactions
* Identify four forms of energy important in human functioning
* Describe the three basic types of chemical reactions
* Identify several factors influencing the rate of chemical reactions

</div>
One characteristic of a living organism is metabolism, which is the sum
total of all of the chemical reactions that go on to maintain that
organism’s health and life. The bonding processes you have learned thus
far are anabolic chemical reactions; that is, they form larger molecules
from smaller molecules or atoms. But recall that metabolism can proceed
in another direction: in catabolic chemical reactions, bonds between
components of larger molecules break, releasing smaller molecules or
atoms. Both types of reaction involve exchanges not only of matter, but
of energy.
{: #fs-id1473680}

<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1254361" markdown="1">
# The Role of Energy in Chemical Reactions
{: data-type="title"}

Chemical reactions require a sufficient amount of energy to cause the
matter to collide with enough precision and force that old chemical
bonds can be broken and new ones formed. In general, <span
data-type="term">kinetic energy</span> is the form of energy powering
any type of matter in motion. Imagine you are building a brick wall. The
energy it takes to lift and place one brick atop another is kinetic
energy—the energy matter possesses because of its motion. Once the wall
is in place, it stores potential energy. <span
data-type="term">Potential energy</span> is the energy of position, or
the energy matter possesses because of the positioning or structure of
its components. If the brick wall collapses, the stored potential energy
is released as kinetic energy as the bricks fall.
{: #fs-id2033760}

In the human body, potential energy is stored in the bonds between atoms
and molecules. <span data-type="term">Chemical energy</span> is the form
of potential energy in which energy is stored in chemical bonds. When
those bonds are formed, chemical energy is invested, and when they
break, chemical energy is released. Notice that chemical energy, like
all energy, is neither created nor destroyed; rather, it is converted
from one form to another. When you eat an energy bar before heading out
the door for a hike, the honey, nuts, and other foods the bar contains
are broken down and rearranged by your body into molecules that your
muscle cells convert to kinetic energy.
{: #fs-id1384002}

Chemical reactions that release more energy than they absorb are
characterized as exergonic. The catabolism of the foods in your energy
bar is an example. Some of the chemical energy stored in the bar is
absorbed into molecules your body uses for fuel, but some of it is
released—for example, as heat. In contrast, chemical reactions that
absorb more energy than they release are endergonic. These reactions
require energy input, and the resulting molecule stores not only the
chemical energy in the original components, but also the energy that
fueled the reaction. Because energy is neither created nor destroyed,
where does the energy needed for endergonic reactions come from? In many
cases, it comes from exergonic reactions.
{: #fs-id1583782}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2566751" markdown="1">
# Forms of Energy Important in Human Functioning
{: data-type="title"}

You have already learned that chemical energy is absorbed, stored, and
released by chemical bonds. In addition to chemical energy, mechanical,
radiant, and electrical energy are important in human functioning.
{: #fs-id1880539}

* Mechanical energy, which is stored in physical systems such as
  machines, engines, or the human body, directly powers the movement of
  matter. When you lift a brick into place on a wall, your muscles
  provide the mechanical energy that moves the brick.
* Radiant energy is energy emitted and transmitted as waves rather than
  matter. These waves vary in length from long radio waves and
  microwaves to short gamma waves emitted from decaying atomic nuclei.
  The full spectrum of radiant energy is referred to as the
  electromagnetic spectrum. The body uses the ultraviolet energy of
  sunlight to convert a compound in skin cells to vitamin D, which is
  essential to human functioning. The human eye evolved to see the
  wavelengths that comprise the colors of the rainbow, from red to
  violet, so that range in the spectrum is called “visible light.”
* Electrical energy, supplied by electrolytes in cells and body fluids,
  contributes to the voltage changes that help transmit impulses in
  nerve and muscle cells.
{: #fs-id1637609}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2103012" markdown="1">
# Characteristics of Chemical Reactions
{: data-type="title"}

All chemical reactions begin with a <span
data-type="term">reactant</span>, the general term for the one or more
substances that enter into the reaction. Sodium and chloride ions, for
example, are the reactants in the production of table salt. The one or
more substances produced by a chemical reaction are called the <span
data-type="term">product</span>.
{: #fs-id2081438}

In chemical reactions, the components of the reactants—the elements
involved and the number of atoms of each—are all present in the
product(s). Similarly, there is nothing present in the products that are
not present in the reactants. This is because chemical reactions are
governed by the law of conservation of mass, which states that matter
cannot be created or destroyed in a chemical reaction.
{: #fs-id1383464}

Just as you can express mathematical calculations in equations such as 2
+ 7 = 9, you can use chemical equations to show how reactants become
products. As in math, chemical equations proceed from left to right, but
instead of an equal sign, they employ an arrow or arrows indicating the
direction in which the chemical reaction proceeds. For example, the
chemical reaction in which one atom of nitrogen and three atoms of
hydrogen produce ammonia would be written as <math
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="left"> <semantics>
<mrow> <mtext>N + 3H</mtext><mo stretchy="false">→</mo><msub> <mrow>
<mtext>NH</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>3</mtext> </msub> </mrow> <annotation
encoding="MathType-MTEF">MathType@MTEF@5@5@+=feaagyart1ev2aaatCvAUfeBSjuyZL2yd9gzLbvyNv2CaerbuLwBLnhiov2DGi1BTfMBaeXatLxBI9gBaerbd9wDYLwzYbItLDharqqtubsr4rNCHbGeaGqiVu0Je9sqqrpepC0xbbL8F4rqqrFfpeea0xe9Lq=Jc9vqaqpepm0xbba9pwe9Q8fs0=yqaqpepae9pg0FirpepeKkFr0xfr=xfr=xb9adbaqaaeGaciGaaiaabeqaamaabaabaaGcbaGaaeOtaiaabccacaqGRaGaaeiiaiaabodacaqGibGaeyOKH4QaaeOtaiaabIeadaWgaaWcbaGaae4maaqabaaaaa@3EA4@</annotation>
</semantics> </math>

. Correspondingly, the breakdown of ammonia into its components would be
written as <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"
display="left"> <semantics> <mrow> <msub> <mrow> <mtext>NH</mtext>
</mrow> <mtext>3</mtext> </msub> <mo
stretchy="false">→</mo><mtext>N + 3H.</mtext> </mrow> </semantics>
</math>
{: #fs-id2177278}

Notice that, in the first example, a nitrogen (N) atom and three
hydrogen (H) atoms bond to form a compound. This anabolic reaction
requires energy, which is then stored within the compound’s bonds. Such
reactions are referred to as synthesis reactions. A <span
data-type="term">synthesis reaction</span> is a chemical reaction that
results in the synthesis (joining) of components that were formerly
separate ([\[link\]](#fig-ch02_03_01){: .autogenerated-content}**a**{:
data-effect="bold"}). Again, nitrogen and hydrogen are reactants in a
synthesis reaction that yields ammonia as the product. The general
equation for a synthesis reaction is <math
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="left"> <semantics>
<mrow> <mtext>A + B</mtext><mo stretchy="false">→</mo><mtext>AB.</mtext>
</mrow> <annotation
encoding="MathType-MTEF">MathType@MTEF@5@5@+=feaagyart1ev2aaatCvAUfeBSjuyZL2yd9gzLbvyNv2CaerbuLwBLnhiov2DGi1BTfMBaeXatLxBI9gBaerbd9wDYLwzYbItLDharqqtubsr4rNCHbGeaGqiVu0Je9sqqrpepC0xbbL8F4rqqrFfpeea0xe9Lq=Jc9vqaqpepm0xbba9pwe9Q8fs0=yqaqpepae9pg0FirpepeKkFr0xfr=xfr=xb9adbaqaaeGaciGaaiaabeqaamaabaabaaqcaauaaiaabgeacaqGGaGaae4kaiaabccacaqGcbGaeyOKH4Qaaeyqaiaabkeaaaa@3D25@</annotation>
</semantics> </math>
{: #fs-id2069935}

<figure id="fig-ch02_03_01">
<div data-type="title">
The Three Fundamental Chemical Reactions
</div>
<figcaption>
The atoms and molecules involved in the three fundamental chemical
reactions can be imagined as words.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1916633" data-alt="This figure shows
three chemical reactions."> ![This figure shows three chemical
reactions.](../resources/211_Three_Fundamental_Chemical_Reactions-01.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="525"} </span>
</figure>
In the second example, ammonia is catabolized into its smaller
components, and the potential energy that had been stored in its bonds
is released. Such reactions are referred to as decomposition reactions.
A <span data-type="term">decomposition reaction</span> is a chemical
reaction that breaks down or “de-composes” something larger into its
constituent parts (see [\[link\]](#fig-ch02_03_01){:
.autogenerated-content}**b**{: data-effect="bold"}). The general
equation for a decomposition reaction is: <math
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="left"> <semantics>
<mrow> <mtext>AB</mtext><mo
stretchy="false">→</mo><mtext>A</mtext><mo>+</mo><mtext>B</mtext>
</mrow> <annotation
encoding="MathType-MTEF">MathType@MTEF@5@5@+=feaagyart1ev2aaatCvAUfeBSjuyZL2yd9gzLbvyNv2CaerbuLwBLnhiov2DGi1BTfMBaeXatLxBI9gBaerbd9wDYLwzYbItLDharqqtubsr4rNCHbGeaGqiVu0Je9sqqrpepC0xbbL8F4rqqrFfpeea0xe9Lq=Jc9vqaqpepm0xbba9pwe9Q8fs0=yqaqpepae9pg0FirpepeKkFr0xfr=xfr=xb9adbaqaaeGaciGaaiaabeqaamaabaabaaqcaauaaiaabgeacaqGcbGaeyOKH4QaaeyqaiabgUcaRiaabkeaaaa@3C13@</annotation>
</semantics> </math>

.
{: #fs-id2152461}

An <span data-type="term">exchange reaction</span> is a chemical
reaction in which both synthesis and decomposition occur, chemical bonds
are both formed and broken, and chemical energy is absorbed, stored, and
released (see [\[link\]](#fig-ch02_03_01){:
.autogenerated-content}**c**{: data-effect="bold"}). The simplest form
of an exchange reaction might be: <math
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="left"> <semantics>
<mrow> <mtext>A</mtext><mo>+</mo><mtext>BC</mtext><mo
stretchy="false">→</mo><mtext>AB</mtext><mo>+</mo><mtext>C</mtext>
</mrow> <annotation
encoding="MathType-MTEF">MathType@MTEF@5@5@+=feaagyart1ev2aaatCvAUfeBSjuyZL2yd9gzLbvyNv2CaerbuLwBLnhiov2DGi1BTfMBaeXatLxBI9gBaerbd9wDYLwzYbItLDharqqtubsr4rNCHbGeaGqiVu0Je9sqqrpepC0xbbL8F4rqqrFfpeea0xe9Lq=Jc9vqaqpepm0xbba9pwe9Q8fs0=yqaqpepae9pg0FirpepeKkFr0xfr=xfr=xb9adbaqaaeGaciGaaiaabeqaamaabaabaaqcaauaaiaabgeacqGHRaWkcaqGcbGaae4qaiabgkziUkaabgeacaqGcbGaey4kaSIaae4qaaaa@3E81@</annotation>
</semantics> </math>

. Notice that, to produce these products, B and C had to break apart in
a decomposition reaction, whereas A and B had to bond in a synthesis
reaction. A more complex exchange reaction might be:<math
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="left"> <semantics>
<mrow> <mtext>AB</mtext><mo>+</mo><mtext>CD</mtext><mo
stretchy="false">→</mo><mtext>AC</mtext><mo>+</mo><mtext>BD</mtext>
</mrow> <annotation
encoding="MathType-MTEF">MathType@MTEF@5@5@+=feaagyart1ev2aaatCvAUfeBSjuyZL2yd9gzLbvyNv2CaerbuLwBLnhiov2DGi1BTfMBaeXatLxBI9gBaerbd9wDYLwzYbItLDharqqtubsr4rNCHbGeaGqiVu0Je9sqqrpepC0xbbL8F4rqqrFfpeea0xe9Lq=Jc9vqaqpepm0xbba9pwe9Q8fs0=yqaqpepae9pg0FirpepeKkFr0xfr=xfr=xb9adbaqaaeGaciGaaiaabeqaamaabaabaaqcaauaaiaabgeacaqGcbGaey4kaSIaae4qaiaabseacqGHsgIRcaqGbbGaae4qaiabgUcaRiaabkeacaqGebaaaa@400F@</annotation>
</semantics> </math>

. Another example might be: <math
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="left"> <semantics>
<mrow> <mtext>AB</mtext><mo>+</mo><mtext>CD</mtext><mo
stretchy="false">→</mo><mtext>AD</mtext><mo>+</mo><mtext>BC</mtext>
</mrow> <annotation
encoding="MathType-MTEF">MathType@MTEF@5@5@+=feaagyart1ev2aaatCvAUfeBSjuyZL2yd9gzLbvyNv2CaerbuLwBLnhiov2DGi1BTfMBaeXatLxBI9gBaerbd9wDYLwzYbItLDharqqtubsr4rNCHbGeaGqiVu0Je9sqqrpepC0xbbL8F4rqqrFfpeea0xe9Lq=Jc9vqaqpepm0xbba9pwe9Q8fs0=yqaqpepae9pg0FirpepeKkFr0xfr=xfr=xb9adbaqaaeGaciGaaiaabeqaamaabaabaaqcaauaaiaabgeacaqGcbGaey4kaSIaae4qaiaabseacqGHsgIRcaqGbbGaaeiraiabgUcaRiaabkeacaqGdbaaaa@400F@</annotation>
</semantics> </math>

.
{: #fs-id2110634}

In theory, any chemical reaction can proceed in either direction under
the right conditions. Reactants may synthesize into a product that is
later decomposed. Reversibility is also a quality of exchange reactions.
For instance, <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"
display="left"> <semantics> <mrow>
<mtext>A</mtext><mo>+</mo><mtext>BC</mtext><mo
stretchy="false">→</mo><mtext>AB</mtext><mo>+</mo><mtext>C</mtext>
</mrow> <annotation
encoding="MathType-MTEF">MathType@MTEF@5@5@+=feaagyart1ev2aaatCvAUfeBSjuyZL2yd9gzLbvyNv2CaerbuLwBLnhiov2DGi1BTfMBaeXatLxBI9gBaerbd9wDYLwzYbItLDharqqtubsr4rNCHbGeaGqiVu0Je9sqqrpepC0xbbL8F4rqqrFfpeea0xe9Lq=Jc9vqaqpepm0xbba9pwe9Q8fs0=yqaqpepae9pg0FirpepeKkFr0xfr=xfr=xb9adbaqaaeGaciGaaiaabeqaamaabaabaaqcaauaaiaabgeacqGHRaWkcaqGcbGaae4qaiabgkziUkaabgeacaqGcbGaey4kaSIaae4qaaaa@3E81@</annotation>
</semantics> </math>

 could then reverse to <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"
display="left"> <semantics> <mrow>
<mtext>AB</mtext><mo>+</mo><mtext>C</mtext><mo
stretchy="false">→</mo><mtext>A</mtext><mo>+</mo><mtext>BC</mtext>
</mrow> <annotation
encoding="MathType-MTEF">MathType@MTEF@5@5@+=feaagyart1ev2aaatCvAUfeBSjuyZL2yd9gzLbvyNv2CaerbuLwBLnhiov2DGi1BTfMBaeXatLxBI9gBaerbd9wDYLwzYbItLDharqqtubsr4rNCHbGeaGqiVu0Je9sqqrpepC0xbbL8F4rqqrFfpeea0xe9Lq=Jc9vqaqpepm0xbba9pwe9Q8fs0=yqaqpepae9pg0FirpepeKkFr0xfr=xfr=xb9adbaqaaeGaciGaaiaabeqaamaabaabaaqcaauaaiaabgeacaqGcbGaey4kaSIaae4qaiabgkziUkaabgeacqGHRaWkcaqGcbGaae4qaaaa@3E81@</annotation>
</semantics> </math>

. This reversibility of a chemical reaction is indicated with a double
arrow: <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="left">
<semantics> <mrow> <mtext>A</mtext><mo>+</mo><mtext>BC</mtext><mo
stretchy="false">⇄</mo><mtext>AB</mtext><mo>+</mo><mtext>C</mtext>
</mrow> <annotation
encoding="MathType-MTEF">MathType@MTEF@5@5@+=feaagyart1ev2aaatCvAUfeBSjuyZL2yd9gzLbvyNv2CaerbuLwBLnhiov2DGi1BTfMBaeXatLxBI9gBaerbd9wDYLwzYbItLDharqqtubsr4rNCHbGeaGqiVu0Je9sqqrpepC0xbbL8F4rqqrFfpeea0xe9Lq=Jc9vqaqpepm0xbba9pwe9Q8fs0=yqaqpepae9pg0FirpepeKkFr0xfr=xfr=xb9adbaqaaeGaciGaaiaabeqaamaabaabaaqcaauaaiaabgeacqGHRaWkcaqGcbGaae4qaiablsCiakaabgeacaqGcbGaey4kaSIaae4qaaaa@3E8A@</annotation>
</semantics> </math>

. Still, in the human body, many chemical reactions do proceed in a
predictable direction, either one way or the other. You can think of
this more predictable path as the path of least resistance because,
typically, the alternate direction requires more energy.
{: #fs-id1618560}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1616095" markdown="1">
# Factors Influencing the Rate of Chemical Reactions
{: data-type="title"}

If you pour vinegar into baking soda, the reaction is instantaneous; the
concoction will bubble and fizz. But many chemical reactions take time.
A variety of factors influence the rate of chemical reactions. This
section, however, will consider only the most important in human
functioning.
{: #fs-id2654903}

<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id2229762" markdown="1">
## Properties of the Reactants
{: data-type="title"}

If chemical reactions are to occur quickly, the atoms in the reactants
have to have easy access to one another. Thus, the greater the surface
area of the reactants, the more readily they will interact. When you pop
a cube of cheese into your mouth, you chew it before you swallow it.
Among other things, chewing increases the surface area of the food so
that digestive chemicals can more easily get at it. As a general rule,
gases tend to react faster than liquids or solids, again because it
takes energy to separate particles of a substance, and gases by
definition already have space between their particles. Similarly, the
larger the molecule, the greater the number of total bonds, so reactions
involving smaller molecules, with fewer total bonds, would be expected
to proceed faster.
{: #fs-id1289953}

In addition, recall that some elements are more reactive than others.
Reactions that involve highly reactive elements like hydrogen proceed
more quickly than reactions that involve less reactive elements.
Reactions involving stable elements like helium are not likely to happen
at all.
{: #fs-id2576559}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id2327547" markdown="1">
## Temperature
{: data-type="title"}

Nearly all chemical reactions occur at a faster rate at higher
temperatures. Recall that kinetic energy is the energy of matter in
motion. The kinetic energy of subatomic particles increases in response
to increases in thermal energy. The higher the temperature, the faster
the particles move, and the more likely they are to come in contact and
react.
{: #fs-id1752078}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1963075" markdown="1">
## Concentration and Pressure
{: data-type="title"}

If just a few people are dancing at a club, they are unlikely to step on
each other’s toes. But as more and more people get up to
dance—especially if the music is fast—collisions are likely to occur. It
is the same with chemical reactions: the more particles present within a
given space, the more likely those particles are to bump into one
another. This means that chemists can speed up chemical reactions not
only by increasing the <span data-type="term">concentration</span> of
particles—the number of particles in the space—but also by decreasing
the volume of the space, which would correspondingly increase the
pressure. If there were 100 dancers in that club, and the manager
abruptly moved the party to a room half the size, the concentration of
the dancers would double in the new space, and the likelihood of
collisions would increase accordingly.
{: #fs-id2254825}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id2365342" markdown="1">
## Enzymes and Other Catalysts
{: data-type="title"}

For two chemicals in nature to react with each other they first have to
come into contact, and this occurs through random collisions. Because
heat helps increase the kinetic energy of atoms, ions, and molecules, it
promotes their collision. But in the body, extremely high heat—such as a
very high fever—can damage body cells and be life-threatening. On the
other hand, normal body temperature is not high enough to promote the
chemical reactions that sustain life. That is where catalysts come in.
{: #fs-id2305458}

In chemistry, a <span data-type="term">catalyst</span> is a substance
that increases the rate of a chemical reaction without itself undergoing
any change. You can think of a catalyst as a chemical change agent. They
help increase the rate and force at which atoms, ions, and molecules
collide, thereby increasing the probability that their valence shell
electrons will interact.
{: #fs-id2371267}

The most important catalysts in the human body are enzymes. An <span
data-type="term">enzyme</span> is a catalyst composed of protein or
ribonucleic acid (RNA), both of which will be discussed later in this
chapter. Like all catalysts, enzymes work by lowering the level of
energy that needs to be invested in a chemical reaction. A chemical
reaction’s <span data-type="term">activation energy</span> is the
“threshold” level of energy needed to break the bonds in the reactants.
Once those bonds are broken, new arrangements can form. Without an
enzyme to act as a catalyst, a much larger investment of energy is
needed to ignite a chemical reaction ([\[link\]](#fig-ch02_03_02){:
.autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id1855242}

<figure id="fig-ch02_03_02">
<div data-type="title">
Enzymes
</div>
<figcaption>
Enzymes decrease the activation energy required for a given chemical
reaction to occur. (a) Without an enzyme, the energy input needed for a
reaction to begin is high. (b) With the help of an enzyme, less energy
is needed for a reaction to begin.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2025561" data-alt="The left panel shows
a graph of energy versus progress of reaction in the absence of enzymes.
The right panel shows the graph in the presence of enzymes."> ![The left
panel shows a graph of energy versus progress of reaction in the absence
of enzymes. The right panel shows the graph in the presence of
enzymes.](../resources/212_Enzymes-01.jpg){: data-media-type="image/jpg"
width="530"} </span>
</figure>
Enzymes are critical to the body’s healthy functioning. They assist, for
example, with the breakdown of food and its conversion to energy. In
fact, most of the chemical reactions in the body are facilitated by
enzymes.
{: #fs-id2151113}

</section>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2338447" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

Chemical reactions, in which chemical bonds are broken and formed,
require an initial investment of energy. Kinetic energy, the energy of
matter in motion, fuels the collisions of atoms, ions, and molecules
that are necessary if their old bonds are to break and new ones to form.
All molecules store potential energy, which is released when their bonds
are broken.
{: #fs-id1278025}

Four forms of energy essential to human functioning are: chemical
energy, which is stored and released as chemical bonds are formed and
broken; mechanical energy, which directly powers physical activity;
radiant energy, emitted as waves such as in sunlight; and electrical
energy, the power of moving electrons.
{: #fs-id1700226}

Chemical reactions begin with reactants and end with products. Synthesis
reactions bond reactants together, a process that requires energy,
whereas decomposition reactions break the bonds within a reactant and
thereby release energy. In exchange reactions, bonds are both broken and
formed, and energy is exchanged.
{: #fs-id1882994}

The rate at which chemical reactions occur is influenced by several
properties of the reactants: temperature, concentration and pressure,
and the presence or absence of a catalyst. An enzyme is a catalytic
protein that speeds up chemical reactions in the human body.
{: #fs-id1470250}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1394424" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2024237">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1384139" markdown="1">
The energy stored in a foot of snow on a steep roof is ________.
{: #fs-id1391982}

1.  potential energy
2.  kinetic energy
3.  radiant energy
4.  activation energy
{: #fs-id2065416 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2643852" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id1917005}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2308224">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2595043" markdown="1">
The bonding of calcium, phosphorus, and other elements produces mineral
crystals that are found in bone. This is an example of a(n) ________
reaction.
{: #fs-id2767629}

1.  catabolic
2.  synthesis
3.  decomposition
4.  exchange
{: #fs-id2129501 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1894311" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id1364833}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1488494">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1470242" markdown="1">
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="left">
<semantics> <mrow> <mtext>AB</mtext><mo
stretchy="false">→</mo><mtext>A</mtext><mo>+</mo><mtext>B</mtext>
</mrow> <annotation
encoding="MathType-MTEF">MathType@MTEF@5@5@+=feaagyart1ev2aaatCvAUfeBSjuyZL2yd9gzLbvyNv2CaerbuLwBLnhiov2DGi1BTfMBaeXatLxBI9gBaerbd9wDYLwzYbItLDharqqtubsr4rNCHbGeaGqiVu0Je9sqqrpepC0xbbL8F4rqqrFfpeea0xe9Lq=Jc9vqaqpepm0xbba9pwe9Q8fs0=yqaqpepae9pg0FirpepeKkFr0xfr=xfr=xb9adbaqaaeGaciGaaiaabeqaamaabaabaaGcbaqcaaKaaeyqaiaabkeacqGHsgIRcaqGbbGaey4kaSIaaeOqaaaa@3C1D@</annotation>
</semantics> </math>

 is a general notation for a(n) ________ reaction.
{: #fs-id1938324}

1.  anabolic
2.  endergonic
3.  decomposition
4.  exchange
{: #fs-id2443794 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1394237" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id2005116}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1266974">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1850712" markdown="1">
________ reactions release energy.
{: #fs-id2394867}

1.  Catabolic
2.  Exergonic
3.  Decomposition
4.  Catabolic, exergonic, and decomposition
{: #fs-id1610781 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1837178" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id1977040}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1250576">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1583568" markdown="1">
Which of the following combinations of atoms is *most likely*{:
data-effect="italics"} to result in a chemical reaction?
{: #fs-id1583569}

1.  hydrogen and hydrogen
2.  hydrogen and helium
3.  helium and helium
4.  neon and helium
{: #fs-id1637103 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1431331" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id1321347}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2177358">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2020653" markdown="1">
Chewing a bite of bread mixes it with saliva and facilitates its
chemical breakdown. This is *most likely*{: data-effect="italics"} due
to the fact that ________.
{: #fs-id2229436}

1.  the inside of the mouth maintains a very high temperature
2.  chewing stores potential energy
3.  chewing facilitates synthesis reactions
4.  saliva contains enzymes
{: #fs-id2199322 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2019984" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id2366928}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2340988" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1885918">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1358455" markdown="1">
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="left">
<semantics> <mrow> <mtext>AB</mtext><mo>+</mo><mtext>CD</mtext><mo
stretchy="false">→</mo><mtext>AD</mtext><mo>+</mo><mtext>BE</mtext>
</mrow> <annotation
encoding="MathType-MTEF">MathType@MTEF@5@5@+=feaagyart1ev2aaatCvAUfeBSjuyZL2yd9gzLbvyNv2CaerbuLwBLnhiov2DGi1BTfMBaeXatLxBI9gBaerbd9wDYLwzYbItLDharqqtubsr4rNCHbGeaGqiVu0Je9sqqrpepC0xbbL8F4rqqrFfpeea0xe9Lq=Jc9vqaqpepm0xbba9pwe9Q8fs0=yqaqpepae9pg0FirpepeKkFr0xfr=xfr=xb9adbaqaaeGaciGaaiaabeqaamaabaabaaqcaauaaiaabgeacaqGcbGaey4kaSIaae4qaiaabseacqGHsgIRcaqGbbGaaeiraiabgUcaRiaabkeacaqGfbaaaa@4011@</annotation>
</semantics> </math>

 Is this a legitimate example of an exchange reaction? Why or why not?
{: #fs-id2164806}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2741285" data-label="" markdown="1">
It is not. An exchange reaction might be <math
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="left"> <semantics>
<mrow> <mtext>AB</mtext><mo>+</mo><mtext>CD</mtext><mo
stretchy="false">→</mo><mtext>AC</mtext><mo>+</mo><mtext>BD</mtext>
</mrow> <annotation
encoding="MathType-MTEF">MathType@MTEF@5@5@+=feaagyart1ev2aaatCvAUfeBSjuyZL2yd9gzLbvyNv2CaerbuLwBLnhiov2DGi1BTfMBaeXatLxBI9gBaerbd9wDYLwzYbItLDharqqtubsr4rNCHbGeaGqiVu0Je9sqqrpepC0xbbL8F4rqqrFfpeea0xe9Lq=Jc9vqaqpepm0xbba9pwe9Q8fs0=yqaqpepae9pg0FirpepeKkFr0xfr=xfr=xb9adbaqaaeGaciGaaiaabeqaamaabaabaaGcbaqcaaKaaeyqaiaabkeacqGHRaWkcaqGdbGaaeiraiabgkziUkaabgeacaqGdbGaey4kaSIaaeOqaiaabseaaaa@4019@</annotation>
</semantics> </math>

 or <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="left">
<semantics> <mrow> <mtext>AB</mtext><mo>+</mo><mtext>CD</mtext><mo
stretchy="false">→</mo><mtext>AD</mtext><mo>+</mo><mtext>BC</mtext>
</mrow> <annotation
encoding="MathType-MTEF">MathType@MTEF@5@5@+=feaagyart1ev2aaatCvAUfeBSjuyZL2yd9gzLbvyNv2CaerbuLwBLnhiov2DGi1BTfMBaeXatLxBI9gBaerbd9wDYLwzYbItLDharqqtubsr4rNCHbGeaGqiVu0Je9sqqrpepC0xbbL8F4rqqrFfpeea0xe9Lq=Jc9vqaqpepm0xbba9pwe9Q8fs0=yqaqpepae9pg0FirpepeKkFr0xfr=xfr=xb9adbaqaaeGaciGaaiaabeqaamaabaabaaGcbaqcaaKaaeyqaiaabkeacqGHRaWkcaqGdbGaaeiraiabgkziUkaabgeacaqGebGaey4kaSIaaeOqaiaaboeaaaa@4019@</annotation>
</semantics> </math>

. In all chemical reactions, including exchange reactions, the
components of the reactants are identical to the components of the
products. A component present among the reactants cannot disappear, nor
can a component not present in the reactants suddenly appear in the
products.
{: #fs-id2080388}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2526180">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1393545" markdown="1">
When you do a load of laundry, why do you not just drop a bar of soap
into the washing machine? In other words, why is laundry detergent sold
as a liquid or powder?
{: #fs-id2639052}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2154617" data-label="" markdown="1">
Recall that the greater the surface area of the reactants, the more
quickly and easily they will interact. It takes energy to separate
particles of a substance. Powder and liquid laundry detergents, with
relatively more surface area per unit, can quickly dissolve into their
reactive components when added to the water.
{: #fs-id2203464}

</div>
</div>
</section>



