---
title: Cellular Differentiation
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Discuss how the generalized cells of a developing embryo or the stem
  cells of an adult organism become differentiated into specialized
  cells
* Distinguish between the categories of stem cells

</div>
How does a complex organism such as a human develop from a single cell—a
fertilized egg—into the vast array of cell types such as nerve cells,
muscle cells, and epithelial cells that characterize the adult?
Throughout development and adulthood, the process of cellular
differentiation leads cells to assume their final morphology and
physiology. Differentiation is the process by which unspecialized cells
become specialized to carry out distinct functions.
{: #fs-id2104336}

<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2316924" markdown="1">
# Stem Cells
{: data-type="title"}

A <span data-type="term">stem cell</span> is an unspecialized cell that
can divide without limit as needed and can, under specific conditions,
differentiate into specialized cells. Stem cells are divided into
several categories according to their potential to differentiate.
{: #fs-id2152443}

The first embryonic cells that arise from the division of the zygote are
the ultimate stem cells; these stems cells are described as <span
data-type="term">totipotent</span> because they have the potential to
differentiate into any of the cells needed to enable an organism to grow
and develop.
{: #fs-id2056386}

The embryonic cells that develop from totipotent stem cells and are
precursors to the fundamental tissue layers of the embryo are classified
as pluripotent. A <span data-type="term">pluripotent</span> stem cell is
one that has the potential to differentiate into any type of human
tissue but cannot support the full development of an organism. These
cells then become slightly more specialized, and are referred to as
multipotent cells.
{: #fs-id2212334}

A <span data-type="term">multipotent</span> stem cell has the potential
to differentiate into different types of cells within a given cell
lineage or small number of lineages, such as a red blood cell or white
blood cell.
{: #fs-id690874}

Finally, multipotent cells can become further specialized oligopotent
cells. An <span data-type="term">oligopotent</span> stem cell is limited
to becoming one of a few different cell types. In contrast, a <span
data-type="term">unipotent</span> cell is fully specialized and can only
reproduce to generate more of its own specific cell type.
{: #fs-id1942506}

Stem cells are unique in that they can also continually divide and
regenerate new stem cells instead of further specializing. There are
different stem cells present at different stages of a human’s life. They
include the embryonic stem cells of the embryo, fetal stem cells of the
fetus, and adult stem cells in the adult. One type of adult stem cell is
the epithelial stem cell, which gives rise to the keratinocytes in the
multiple layers of epithelial cells in the epidermis of skin. Adult bone
marrow has three distinct types of stem cells: hematopoietic stem cells,
which give rise to red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets
([\[link\]](#fig-ch03_06_01){: .autogenerated-content}); endothelial
stem cells, which give rise to the endothelial cell types that line
blood and lymph vessels; and mesenchymal stem cells, which give rise to
the different types of muscle cells.
{: #fs-id1554790}

<figure id="fig-ch03_06_01">
<div data-type="title">
Hematopoiesis
</div>
<figcaption>
The process of hematopoiesis involves the differentiation of multipotent
cells into blood and immune cells. The multipotent hematopoietic stem
cells give rise to many different cell types, including the cells of the
immune system and red blood cells.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1862585" data-alt="This flowchart shows
the differentiation of a hemocytoblast, a stem cell, into the different
types of cells found in blood."> ![This flowchart shows the
differentiation of a hemocytoblast, a stem cell, into the different
types of cells found in
blood.](../resources/0337_Hematopoiesis_new.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="600"} </span>
</figure>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1521639" markdown="1">
# Differentiation
{: data-type="title"}

When a cell differentiates (becomes more specialized), it may undertake
major changes in its size, shape, metabolic activity, and overall
function. Because all cells in the body, beginning with the fertilized
egg, contain the same DNA, how do the different cell types come to be so
different? The answer is analogous to a movie script. The different
actors in a movie all read from the same script, however, they are each
only reading their own part of the script. Similarly, all cells contain
the same full complement of DNA, but each type of cell only “reads” the
portions of DNA that are relevant to its own function. In biology, this
is referred to as the unique genetic expression of each cell.
{: #fs-id2285764}

In order for a cell to differentiate into its specialized form and
function, it need only manipulate those genes (and thus those proteins)
that will be expressed, and not those that will remain silent. The
primary mechanism by which genes are turned “on” or “off” is through
transcription factors. A <span data-type="term">transcription
factor</span> is one of a class of proteins that bind to specific genes
on the DNA molecule and either promote or inhibit their transcription
([\[link\]](#fig-ch03_06_02){: .autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id1544098}

<figure id="fig-ch03_06_02">
<div data-type="title">
Transcription Factors Regulate Gene Expression
</div>
<figcaption>
While each body cell contains the organism’s entire genome, different
cells regulate gene expression with the use of various transcription
factors. Transcription factors are proteins that affect the binding of
RNA polymerase to a particular gene on the DNA molecule.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1857938" data-alt="This diagram shows
transcription factors and then RNA polymerase binding to a stretch of
RNA to initiate transcription."> ![This diagram shows transcription
factors and then RNA polymerase binding to a stretch of RNA to initiate
transcription.](../resources/0338_RNA_Polymerase_Binding.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="525"} </span>
</figure>
<div data-type="note" id="fs-id704569" class="anatomy everyday" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Everyday Connection
</div>
<span data-type="title">Stem Cell Research</span> Stem cell research
aims to find ways to use stem cells to regenerate and repair cellular
damage. Over time, most adult cells undergo the wear and tear of aging
and lose their ability to divide and repair themselves. Stem cells do
not display a particular morphology or function. Adult stem cells, which
exist as a small subset of cells in most tissues, keep dividing and can
differentiate into a number of specialized cells generally formed by
that tissue. These cells enable the body to renew and repair body
tissues.
{: #fs-id1332564}

The mechanisms that induce a non-differentiated cell to become a
specialized cell are poorly understood. In a laboratory setting, it is
possible to induce stem cells to differentiate into specialized cells by
changing the physical and chemical conditions of growth. Several sources
of stem cells are used experimentally and are classified according to
their origin and potential for differentiation. Human embryonic stem
cells (hESCs) are extracted from embryos and are pluripotent. The adult
stem cells that are present in many organs and differentiated tissues,
such as bone marrow and skin, are multipotent, being limited in
differentiation to the types of cells found in those tissues. The stem
cells isolated from umbilical cord blood are also multipotent, as are
cells from deciduous teeth (baby teeth). Researchers have recently
developed induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from mouse and human
adult stem cells. These cells are genetically reprogrammed multipotent
adult cells that function like embryonic stem cells; they are capable of
generating cells characteristic of all three germ layers.
{: #fs-id1534313}

Because of their capacity to divide and differentiate into specialized
cells, stem cells offer a potential treatment for diseases such as
diabetes and heart disease ([\[link\]](#fig-ch03_06_03){:
.autogenerated-content}). Cell-based therapy refers to treatment in
which stem cells induced to differentiate in a growth dish are injected
into a patient to repair damaged or destroyed cells or tissues. Many
obstacles must be overcome for the application of cell-based therapy.
Although embryonic stem cells have a nearly unlimited range of
differentiation potential, they are seen as foreign by the patient’s
immune system and may trigger rejection. Also, the destruction of
embryos to isolate embryonic stem cells raises considerable ethical and
legal questions.
{: #fs-id1532957}

<figure id="fig-ch03_06_03">
<div data-type="title">
Stem Cells
</div>
<figcaption>
The capacity of stem cells to differentiate into specialized cells make
them potentially valuable in therapeutic applications designed to
replace damaged cells of different body tissues.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1142190" data-alt="This flow chart
shows the differentiation of stem cells into different cell types. The
top layer shows a totipotent stem cell, which becomes a pluripotent stem
cell and then a multipotent stem cell. A multipotent stem cell can then
differentiate into different cell types."> ![This flow chart shows the
differentiation of stem cells into different cell types. The top layer
shows a totipotent stem cell, which becomes a pluripotent stem cell and
then a multipotent stem cell. A multipotent stem cell can then
differentiate into different cell
types.](../resources/422_Feature_Stem_Cell_new.png){:
data-media-type="image/png" width="500"} </span>
</figure>
In contrast, adult stem cells isolated from a patient are not seen as
foreign by the body, but they have a limited range of differentiation.
Some individuals bank the cord blood or deciduous teeth of their child,
storing away those sources of stem cells for future use, should their
child need it. Induced pluripotent stem cells are considered a promising
advance in the field because using them avoids the legal, ethical, and
immunological pitfalls of embryonic stem cells.
{: #fs-id1189584}

</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2168882" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

One of the major areas of research in biology is that of how cells
specialize to assume their unique structures and functions, since all
cells essentially originate from a single fertilized egg. Cell
differentiation is the process of cells becoming specialized as they
body develops. A stem cell is an unspecialized cell that can divide
without limit as needed and can, under specific conditions,
differentiate into specialized cells. Stem cells are divided into
several categories according to their potential to differentiate. While
all somatic cells contain the exact same genome, different cell types
only express some of those genes at any given time. These differences in
gene expression ultimately dictate a cell’s unique morphological and
physiological characteristics. The primary mechanism that determines
which genes will be expressed and which ones will not is through the use
of different transcription factor proteins, which bind to DNA and
promote or hinder the transcription of different genes. Through the
action of these transcription factors, cells specialize into one of
hundreds of different cell types in the human body.
{: #fs-id1072987}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1082558" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1183443">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1524499" markdown="1">
Arrange the following terms in order of increasing specialization:
oligopotency, pleuripotency, unipotency, multipotency.
{: #fs-id756448}

1.  multipotency, pleuripotency, oligopotency, unipotency
2.  pleuripotency, oligopotency, multipotency unipotency
3.  oligopotency, pleuripotency, unipotency, multipotency
4.  pleuripotency, multipotency, oligopotency, unipotency
{: #fs-id1531080 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1303978" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id1526263}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1497003">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1739430" markdown="1">
Which type of stem cell gives rise to red and white blood cells?
{: #fs-id522998}

1.  endothelial
2.  epithelial
3.  hematopoietic
4.  mesenchymal
{: #fs-id1510727 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1486055" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id1502083}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1526011">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1265569" markdown="1">
What multipotent stem cells from children sometimes banked by parents?
{: #fs-id1530832}

1.  fetal stem cells
2.  embryonic stem cells
3.  cells from the umbilical cord and from baby teeth
4.  hematopoietic stem cells from red and white blood cells
{: #fs-id1491891 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1452730" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id2152231}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1493210" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1241719">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1486383" markdown="1">
Explain how a transcription factor ultimately determines whether or not
a protein will be present in a given cell?
{: #fs-id1097621}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1282693" data-label="" markdown="1">
Transcription factors bind to DNA and either promote or inhibit the
transcription of a gene. If they promote the transcription of a
particular gene, then that gene will be transcribed and the mRNA
subsequently translated into protein. If gene transcription is
inhibited, then there will be no way of synthesizing the gene’s
corresponding protein.
{: #fs-id1235652}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1183899">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1120497" markdown="1">
Discuss two reasons why the therapeutic use of embryonic stem cells can
present a problem.
{: #fs-id1197916}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1527302" data-label="" markdown="1">
Embryonic stem cells derive from human embryos, which are destroyed to
obtain the cells. The destruction of human embryos is an ethical
problem. And, the DNA in an embryonic stem cell would differ from the
DNA of the person being treated, which could result in immune problems
or rejected of tissue.
{: #fs-id1056908}

</div>
</div>
</section>



