---
title: "Functions of the Integumentary System"
layout: page
tags: debug
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
* Describe the different functions of the skin and the structures that
  enable them
* Explain how the skin helps maintain body temperature

</div>
The skin and accessory structures perform a variety of essential
functions, such as protecting the body from invasion by microorganisms,
chemicals, and other environmental factors; preventing dehydration;
acting as a sensory organ; modulating body temperature and electrolyte
balance; and synthesizing vitamin D. The underlying hypodermis has
important roles in storing fats, forming a “cushion” over underlying
structures, and providing insulation from cold temperatures.

# Protection

The skin protects the rest of the body from the basic elements of nature
such as wind, water, and UV sunlight. It acts as a protective barrier
against water loss, due to the presence of layers of keratin and
glycolipids in the stratum corneum. It also is the first line of defense
against abrasive activity due to contact with grit, microbes, or harmful
chemicals. Sweat excreted from sweat glands deters microbes from
over-colonizing the skin surface by generating dermicidin, which has
antibiotic properties.

<div data-type="note" class="anatomy everyday" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Everyday Connection
</div>
<span data-type="title">Tattoos and Piercings</span> The word “armor”
evokes several images. You might think of a Roman centurion or a
medieval knight in a suit of armor. The skin, in its own way, functions
as a form of armor—body armor. It provides a barrier between your vital,
life-sustaining organs and the influence of outside elements that could
potentially damage them.

For any form of armor, a breach in the protective barrier poses a
danger. The skin can be breached when a child skins a knee or an adult
has blood drawn—one is accidental and the other medically necessary.
However, you also breach this barrier when you choose to “accessorize”
your skin with a tattoo or body piercing. Because the needles involved
in producing body art and piercings must penetrate the skin, there are
dangers associated with the practice. These include allergic reactions;
skin infections; blood-borne diseases, such as tetanus, hepatitis C, and
hepatitis D; and the growth of scar tissue. Despite the risk, the
practice of piercing the skin for decorative purposes has become
increasingly popular. According to the American Academy of Dermatology,
24 percent of people from ages 18 to 50 have a tattoo.

</div>
<div data-type="note" class="anatomy interactive" data-label="" markdown="1">
<span data-type="media" data-alt="QR Code representing a URL"> ![QR Code
representing a URL](../resources/tattoo.png){:
data-media-type="image/png"} </span>
Tattooing has a long history, dating back thousands of years ago. The
dyes used in tattooing typically derive from metals. A person with
tattoos should be cautious when having a magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) scan because an MRI machine uses powerful magnets to create images
of the soft tissues of the body, which could react with the metals
contained in the tattoo dyes. Watch this [video][1] to learn more about
tattooing.

</div>

# Sensory Function

The fact that you can feel an ant crawling on your skin, allowing you to
flick it off before it bites, is because the skin, and especially the
hairs projecting from hair follicles in the skin, can sense changes in
the environment. The hair root plexus surrounding the base of the hair
follicle senses a disturbance, and then transmits the information to the
central nervous system (brain and spinal cord), which can then respond
by activating the skeletal muscles of your eyes to see the ant and the
skeletal muscles of the body to act against the ant.

The skin acts as a sense organ because the epidermis, dermis, and the
hypodermis contain specialized sensory nerve structures that detect
touch, surface temperature, and pain. These receptors are more
concentrated on the tips of the fingers, which are most sensitive to
touch, especially the <span data-type="term">Meissner corpuscle</span>
(tactile corpuscle) ([\[link\]](#fig-ch05_03_01){:
.autogenerated-content}), which responds to light touch, and the <span
data-type="term">Pacinian corpuscle</span> (lamellated corpuscle), which
responds to vibration. Merkel cells, seen scattered in the stratum
basale, are also touch receptors. In addition to these specialized
receptors, there are sensory nerves connected to each hair follicle,
pain and temperature receptors scattered throughout the skin, and motor
nerves innervate the arrector pili muscles and glands. This rich
innervation helps us sense our environment and react accordingly.

![This micrograph shows a skin cross section at low magnification. The Meissner&#x2019;s corpuscle is a large, oval-shaped structure located in the papillary layer of the dermis, under the lowest deepest layer of the epidermis. The corpuscle contains a dark staining oval within the outer, light staining oval. Several horizontal bars are arranged vertically within the inner oval. Also, several cells with dark purple nuclei can be seen scattered throughout the corpuscle.](../resources/514_Light_Micrograph_of_a_Meissner_Corpuscle.jpg " In this micrograph of a skin cross-section, you can see a Meissner corpuscle (arrow), a type of touch receptor located in a dermal papilla adjacent to the basement membrane and stratum basale of the overlying epidermis. LM &#xD7; 100. (credit: &#x201C;Wbensmith&#x201D;/Wikimedia Commons)"){: #fig-ch05_03_01 data-media-type="image/jpg" data-title="Light Micrograph of a Meissneer Corpuscle"}

# Thermoregulation

The integumentary system helps regulate body temperature through its
tight association with the sympathetic nervous system, the division of
the nervous system involved in our fight-or-flight responses. The
sympathetic nervous system is continuously monitoring body temperature
and initiating appropriate motor responses. Recall that sweat glands,
accessory structures to the skin, secrete water, salt, and other
substances to cool the body when it becomes warm. Even when the body
does not appear to be noticeably sweating, approximately 500 mL of sweat
(insensible perspiration) are secreted a day. If the body becomes
excessively warm due to high temperatures, vigorous activity
([\[link\]](#fig-ch05_03_02){: .autogenerated-content}**ac**), or a
combination of the two, sweat glands will be stimulated by the
sympathetic nervous system to produce large amounts of sweat, as much as
0.7 to 1.5 L per hour for an active person. When the sweat evaporates
from the skin surface, the body is cooled as body heat is dissipated.

In addition to sweating, arterioles in the dermis dilate so that excess
heat carried by the blood can dissipate through the skin and into the
surrounding environment ([\[link\]](#fig-ch05_03_02){:
.autogenerated-content}**b**). This accounts for the skin redness that
many people experience when exercising.

![Part A is a photo of a man skiing with several snow-covered trees in the background. Part B is a diagram with a right and left half. The left half is titled &#x201C; Heat is retained by the body,&#x201D; while the right half is titled &#x201C;Heat loss through radiation and convection.&#x201D; Both show blood flowing from an artery through three capillary beds within the skin. The beds are arranged vertically, with the topmost bed located along the boundary of the dermis and epidermis. The bottommost bed is located deep in the hypodermis. The middle bed is evenly spaced between the topmost and bottommost beds. In each bed, oxygenated blood (red) enters the bed on the left and deoxygenated blood (blue) leaves the bed on the right. The left diagram shows a picture of snowflakes above the capillary beds, indicating that the weather is cold. Blood is only flowing through the deepest of the three capillary beds, as the upper beds are closed off to reduce heat loss from the outer layers of the skin. The right diagram shows a picture of the sun above the capillary beds, indicating that the weather is hot. Blood is flowing through all three capillary beds, allowing heat to radiate out of the blood, increasing heat loss. Part C is a photo of a man running through a forested trail on a summer day.](../resources/515_Thermoregulation.jpg " During strenuous physical activities, such as skiing (a) or running (c), the dermal blood vessels dilate and sweat secretion increases (b). These mechanisms prevent the body from overheating. In contrast, the dermal blood vessels constrict to minimize heat loss in response to low temperatures (b). (credit a: &#x201C;Trysil&#x201D;/flickr; credit c: Ralph Daily)"){: #fig-ch05_03_02 data-media-type="image/jpg" data-title="Thermoregulation"}

When body temperatures drop, the arterioles constrict to minimize heat
loss, particularly in the ends of the digits and tip of the nose. This
reduced circulation can result in the skin taking on a whitish hue.
Although the temperature of the skin drops as a result, passive heat
loss is prevented, and internal organs and structures remain warm. If
the temperature of the skin drops too much (such as environmental
temperatures below freezing), the conservation of body core heat can
result in the skin actually freezing, a condition called frostbite.

<div data-type="note" class="anatomy aging" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Aging and the…
</div>
<span data-type="title">Integumentary System</span> All systems in the
body accumulate subtle and some not-so-subtle changes as a person ages.
Among these changes are reductions in cell division, metabolic activity,
blood circulation, hormonal levels, and muscle strength
([\[link\]](#fig-ch05_03_03){: .autogenerated-content}). In the skin,
these changes are reflected in decreased mitosis in the stratum basale,
leading to a thinner epidermis. The dermis, which is responsible for the
elasticity and resilience of the skin, exhibits a reduced ability to
regenerate, which leads to slower wound healing. The hypodermis, with
its fat stores, loses structure due to the reduction and redistribution
of fat, which in turn contributes to the thinning and sagging of skin.

![This figure consists of two photos. One photo shows a young woman on
the phone. Her skin is smooth and unwrinkled. The other photo shows an
elderly women in the same posture while on the phone. The skin of her
hands and forearms is wrinkled.](../resources/516_Aging.jpg " Generally,
skin, especially on the face and hands, starts to display the first
noticeable signs of aging, as it loses its elasticity over time.
(credit: Janet Ramsden)"){: #fig-ch05_03_03 data-media-type="image/jpg"
data-title="Aging" data-z-for-sed=""}
The accessory structures also have lowered activity, generating thinner
hair and nails, and reduced amounts of sebum and sweat. A reduced
sweating ability can cause some elderly to be intolerant to extreme
heat. Other cells in the skin, such as melanocytes and dendritic cells,
also become less active, leading to a paler skin tone and lowered
immunity. Wrinkling of the skin occurs due to breakdown of its
structure, which results from decreased collagen and elastin production
in the dermis, weakening of muscles lying under the skin, and the
inability of the skin to retain adequate moisture.

Many anti-aging products can be found in stores today. In general, these
products try to rehydrate the skin and thereby fill out the wrinkles,
and some stimulate skin growth using hormones and growth factors.
Additionally, invasive techniques include collagen injections to plump
the tissue and injections of BOTOX<sup>®</sup> (the name brand of the
botulinum neurotoxin) that paralyze the muscles that crease the skin and
cause wrinkling.

</div>

# Vitamin D Synthesis

The epidermal layer of human skin synthesizes <span
data-type="term">vitamin D</span> when exposed to UV radiation. In the
presence of sunlight, a form of vitamin D<sub>3</sub> called
cholecalciferol is synthesized from a derivative of the steroid
cholesterol in the skin. The liver converts cholecalciferol to
calcidiol, which is then converted to calcitriol (the active chemical
form of the vitamin) in the kidneys. Vitamin D is essential for normal
absorption of calcium and phosphorous, which are required for healthy
bones. The absence of sun exposure can lead to a lack of vitamin D in
the body, leading to a condition called <span
data-type="term">rickets</span>, a painful condition in children where
the bones are misshapen due to a lack of calcium, causing bowleggedness.
Elderly individuals who suffer from vitamin D deficiency can develop a
condition called osteomalacia, a softening of the bones. In present day
society, vitamin D is added as a supplement to many foods, including
milk and orange juice, compensating for the need for sun exposure.

In addition to its essential role in bone health, vitamin D is essential
for general immunity against bacterial, viral, and fungal infections.
Recent studies are also finding a link between insufficient vitamin D
and cancer.

# Chapter Review

The skin plays important roles in protection, sensing stimuli,
thermoregulation, and vitamin D synthesis. It is the first layer of
defense to prevent dehydration, infection, and injury to the rest of the
body. Sweat glands in the skin allow the skin surface to cool when the
body gets overheated. Thermoregulation is also accomplished by the
dilation or constriction of heat-carrying blood vessels in the skin.
Immune cells present among the skin layers patrol the areas to keep them
free of foreign materials. Fat stores in the hypodermis aid in both
thermoregulation and protection. Finally, the skin plays a role in the
synthesis of vitamin D, which is necessary for our well-being but not
easily available in natural foods.

# Review Questions

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
In humans, exposure of the skin to sunlight is required for ________.

1.  vitamin D synthesis
2.  arteriole constriction
3.  folate production
4.  thermoregulation
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
A

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
One of the functions of the integumentary system is protection. Which of
the following does not directly contribute to that function?

1.  stratum lucidum
2.  desmosomes
3.  folic acid synthesis
4.  Merkel cells
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
C

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
An individual using a sharp knife notices a small amount of blood where
he just cut himself. Which of the following layers of skin did he have
to cut into in order to bleed?

1.  stratum corneum
2.  stratum basale
3.  papillary dermis
4.  stratum granulosum
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
C

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
As you are walking down the beach, you see a dead, dry, shriveled-up
fish. Which layer of your epidermis keeps you from drying out?

1.  stratum corneum
2.  stratum basale
3.  stratum spinosum
4.  stratum granulosum
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
A

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
If you cut yourself and bacteria enter the wound, which of the following
cells would help get rid of the bacteria?

1.  Merkel cells
2.  keratinocytes
3.  Langerhans cells
4.  melanocytes
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
C

</div>
</div>

# Critical Thinking Questions

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Why do people sweat excessively when exercising outside on a hot day?

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
Sweating cools the body when it becomes warm. When the body temperature
rises, such as when exercising on a hot day, the dermal blood vessels
dilate, and the sweat glands begin to secrete more sweat. The
evaporation of the sweat from the surface of the skin cools the body by
dissipating heat.

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Explain your skin’s response to a drop in body core temperature.

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
When the core body temperature drops, the body switches to
heat-conservation mode. This can include an inhibition to excessive
sweating and a decrease of blood flow to the papillary layers of the
skin. This reduction of blood flow helps conserve body heat.

</div>
</div>

# References

American Academy of Dermatology (US). Tattoos and body piercings
\[Internet\]. Schaumburg, IL; c2013 \[cited 2012 Nov 1\]. Available
from:
[http://www.aad.org/media-resources/stats-and-facts/prevention-and-care/tattoos-and-body-piercings/][2].




[1]: http://openstaxcollege.org/l/tattoo
[2]: http://www.aad.org/media-resources/stats-and-facts/prevention-and-care/tattoos-and-body-piercings/
