---
title: Bone Classification
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Classify bones according to their shapes
* Describe the function of each category of bones

</div>
The 206 bones that compose the adult skeleton are divided into five
categories based on their shapes ([\[link\]](#fig-ch06_02_01){:
.autogenerated-content}). Their shapes and their functions are related
such that each categorical shape of bone has a distinct function.
{: #fs-id1323961}

<figure id="fig-ch06_02_01">
<div data-type="title">
Classifications of Bones
</div>
<figcaption>
Bones are classified according to their shape.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1955545" data-alt="This illustration
shows an anterior view of a human skeleton with call outs of five bones.
The first call out is the sternum, or breast bone, which lies along the
midline of the thorax. The sternum is the bone to which the ribs connect
at the front of the body. It is classified as a flat bone and appears
somewhat like a tie, with an enlarged upper section and a thin,
tapering, lower section. The next callout is the right femur, which is
the thigh bone. The inferior end of the femur is broad where it connects
to the knee while the superior edge is ball-shaped where it attaches to
the hip socket. The femur is an example of a long bone. The next callout
is of the patella or kneecap. It is a small, wedge-shaped bone that sits
on the anterior side of the knee. The kneecap is an example of a
sesamoid bone. The next callout is a dorsal view of the right foot. The
lateral, intermediate and medial cuneiform bones are small,
square-shaped bones of the top of the foot. These bones lie between the
proximal edge of the toe bones and the inferior edge of the shin bones.
The lateral cuneiform is proximal to the fourth toe while the medial
cuneiform is proximal to the great toe. The intermediate cuneiform lies
between the lateral and medial cuneiform. These bones are examples of
short bones. The fifth callout shows a superior view of one of the
lumbar vertebrae. The vertebra has a kidney-shaped body connected to a
triangle of bone that projects above the body of the vertebra. Two
spines project off of the triangle at approximately 45 degree angles.
The vertebrae are examples of irregular bones."> ![This illustration
shows an anterior view of a human skeleton with call outs of five bones.
The first call out is the sternum, or breast bone, which lies along the
midline of the thorax. The sternum is the bone to which the ribs connect
at the front of the body. It is classified as a flat bone and appears
somewhat like a tie, with an enlarged upper section and a thin,
tapering, lower section. The next callout is the right femur, which is
the thigh bone. The inferior end of the femur is broad where it connects
to the knee while the superior edge is ball-shaped where it attaches to
the hip socket. The femur is an example of a long bone. The next callout
is of the patella or kneecap. It is a small, wedge-shaped bone that sits
on the anterior side of the knee. The kneecap is an example of a
sesamoid bone. The next callout is a dorsal view of the right foot. The
lateral, intermediate and medial cuneiform bones are small,
square-shaped bones of the top of the foot. These bones lie between the
proximal edge of the toe bones and the inferior edge of the shin bones.
The lateral cuneiform is proximal to the fourth toe while the medial
cuneiform is proximal to the great toe. The intermediate cuneiform lies
between the lateral and medial cuneiform. These bones are examples of
short bones. The fifth callout shows a superior view of one of the
lumbar vertebrae. The vertebra has a kidney-shaped body connected to a
triangle of bone that projects above the body of the vertebra. Two
spines project off of the triangle at approximately 45 degree angles.
The vertebrae are examples of irregular
bones.](../resources/601_Bone_Classification.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpeg" width="600"} </span>
</figure>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1170296" markdown="1">
# Long Bones
{: data-type="title"}

A <span data-type="term">long bone</span> is one that is cylindrical in
shape, being longer than it is wide. Keep in mind, however, that the
term describes the shape of a bone, not its size. Long bones are found
in the arms (humerus, ulna, radius) and legs (femur, tibia, fibula), as
well as in the fingers (metacarpals, phalanges) and toes (metatarsals,
phalanges). Long bones function as levers; they move when muscles
contract.
{: #fs-id856306}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1639531" markdown="1">
# Short Bones
{: data-type="title"}

A <span data-type="term">short bone</span> is one that is cube-like in
shape, being approximately equal in length, width, and thickness. The
only short bones in the human skeleton are in the carpals of the wrists
and the tarsals of the ankles. Short bones provide stability and support
as well as some limited motion.
{: #fs-id962590}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1016222" markdown="1">
# Flat Bones
{: data-type="title"}

The term “<span data-type="term">flat bone</span>” is somewhat of a
misnomer because, although a flat bone is typically thin, it is also
often curved. Examples include the cranial (skull) bones, the scapulae
(shoulder blades), the sternum (breastbone), and the ribs. Flat bones
serve as points of attachment for muscles and often protect internal
organs.
{: #fs-id1739295}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1643285" markdown="1">
# Irregular Bones
{: data-type="title"}

An <span data-type="term">irregular bone</span> is one that does not
have any easily characterized shape and therefore does not fit any other
classification. These bones tend to have more complex shapes, like the
vertebrae that support the spinal cord and protect it from compressive
forces. Many facial bones, particularly the ones containing sinuses, are
classified as irregular bones.
{: #fs-id1064136}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1170424" markdown="1">
# Sesamoid Bones
{: data-type="title"}

A <span data-type="term">sesamoid bone</span> is a small, round bone
that, as the name suggests, is shaped like a sesame seed. These bones
form in tendons (the sheaths of tissue that connect bones to muscles)
where a great deal of pressure is generated in a joint. The sesamoid
bones protect tendons by helping them overcome compressive forces.
Sesamoid bones vary in number and placement from person to person but
are typically found in tendons associated with the feet, hands, and
knees. The patellae (singular = patella) are the only sesamoid bones
found in common with every person. [\[link\]](#tbl-ch06_01){:
.autogenerated-content} reviews bone classifications with their
associated features, functions, and examples.
{: #fs-id773871}

<table id="tbl-ch06_01" summary="Bone Classifications"><thead> <tr> <th colspan="4">Bone Classifications</th> </tr> <tr> <th>Bone classification</th> <th>Features</th> <th>Function(s)</th> <th>Examples</th> </tr> </thead><tbody> <tr><td>Long</td> <td>Cylinder-like shape, longer than it is wide</td> <td>Leverage</td> <td>Femur, tibia, fibula, metatarsals, humerus, ulna, radius, metacarpals, phalanges</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Short</td> <td>Cube-like shape, approximately equal in length, width, and thickness</td> <td>Provide stability, support, while allowing for some motion</td> <td>Carpals, tarsals</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Flat</td> <td>Thin and curved</td> <td>Points of attachment for muscles; protectors of internal organs</td> <td>Sternum, ribs, scapulae, cranial bones</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Irregular</td> <td>Complex shape</td> <td>Protect internal organs</td> <td>Vertebrae, facial bones</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Sesamoid</td> <td>Small and round; embedded in tendons</td> <td>Protect tendons from compressive forces</td> <td>Patellae</td> </tr> </tbody></table>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1534723" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

Bones can be classified according to their shapes. Long bones, such as
the femur, are longer than they are wide. Short bones, such as the
carpals, are approximately equal in length, width, and thickness. Flat
bones are thin, but are often curved, such as the ribs. Irregular bones
such as those of the face have no characteristic shape. Sesamoid bones,
such as the patellae, are small and round, and are located in tendons.
{: #fs-id1862528}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1239338" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1859097">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1168022" markdown="1">
Most of the bones of the arms and hands are long bones; however, the
bones in the wrist are categorized as ________.
{: #fs-id1272003}

1.  flat bones
2.  short bones
3.  sesamoid bones
4.  irregular bones
{: #fs-id1812322 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1189148" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id756984}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1057151">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1696501" markdown="1">
Sesamoid bones are found embedded in ________.
{: #fs-id1954534}

1.  joints
2.  muscles
3.  ligaments
4.  tendons
{: #fs-id1467311 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id951414" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id1857824}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1434572">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1016227" markdown="1">
Bones that surround the spinal cord are classified as ________ bones.
{: #fs-id1689547}

1.  irregular
2.  sesamoid
3.  flat
4.  short
{: #fs-id756453 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1594732" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id1467920}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id691668">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id692297" markdown="1">
Which category of bone is among the most numerous in the skeleton?
{: #fs-id1301140}

1.  long bone
2.  sesamoid bone
3.  short bone
4.  flat bone
{: #fs-id1236964 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1273266" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id1392812}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1284008">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id787492" markdown="1">
Long bones enable body movement by acting as a ________.
{: #fs-id1554725}

1.  counterweight
2.  resistive force
3.  lever
4.  fulcrum
{: #fs-id1859796 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id813284" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id1859790}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1641280" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1319983">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1476517" markdown="1">
What are the structural and functional differences between a tarsal and
a metatarsal?
{: #fs-id1534146}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1512226" data-label="" markdown="1">
Structurally, a tarsal is a short bone, meaning its length, width, and
thickness are about equal, while a metatarsal is a long bone whose
length is greater than its width. Functionally, the tarsal provides
limited motion, while the metatarsal acts as a lever.
{: #fs-id1270632}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1311450">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1733552" markdown="1">
What are the structural and functional differences between the femur and
the patella?
{: #fs-id1618681}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1455888" data-label="" markdown="1">
Structurally, the femur is a long bone, meaning its length is greater
than its width, while the patella, a sesamoid bone, is small and round.
Functionally, the femur acts as a lever, while the patella protects the
patellar tendon from compressive forces.
{: #fs-id1271570}

</div>
</div>
</section>



