---
title: "Calcium Homeostasis: Interactions of the Skeletal System and Other Organ Systems"
layout: page
---
---

<div data-type="title">
Calcium Homeostasis: Interactions of the Skeletal System and Other Organ
Systems
</div>
<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Describe the effect of too much or too little calcium on the body
* Explain the process of calcium homeostasis

</div>
Calcium is not only the most abundant mineral in bone, it is also the
most abundant mineral in the human body. Calcium ions are needed not
only for bone mineralization but for tooth health, regulation of the
heart rate and strength of contraction, blood coagulation, contraction
of smooth and skeletal muscle cells, and regulation of nerve impulse
conduction. The normal level of calcium in the blood is about 10 mg/dL.
When the body cannot maintain this level, a person will experience hypo-
or hypercalcemia.
{: #fs-id1286750}

<span data-type="term">Hypocalcemia</span>, a condition characterized by
abnormally low levels of calcium, can have an adverse effect on a number
of different body systems including circulation, muscles, nerves, and
bone. Without adequate calcium, blood has difficulty coagulating, the
heart may skip beats or stop beating altogether, muscles may have
difficulty contracting, nerves may have difficulty functioning, and
bones may become brittle. The causes of hypocalcemia can range from
hormonal imbalances to an improper diet. Treatments vary according to
the cause, but prognoses are generally good.
{: #fs-id1858508}

Conversely, in <span data-type="term">hypercalcemia</span>, a condition
characterized by abnormally high levels of calcium, the nervous system
is underactive, which results in lethargy, sluggish reflexes,
constipation and loss of appetite, confusion, and in severe cases, coma.
{: #fs-id1740062}

Obviously, calcium homeostasis is critical. The skeletal, endocrine, and
digestive systems play a role in this, but the kidneys do, too. These
body systems work together to maintain a normal calcium level in the
blood ([\[link\]](#fig-ch06_07_01){: .autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id1081950}

<figure id="fig-ch06_07_01">
<div data-type="title">
Pathways in Calcium Homeostasis
</div>
<figcaption>
The body regulates calcium homeostasis with two pathways; one is
signaled to turn on when blood calcium levels drop below normal and one
is the pathway that is signaled to turn on when blood calcium levels are
elevated.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1091621" data-alt="In this
illustration, the two mechanisms that maintain calcium homeostasis are
shown as two semicircles that are combined, one on top of each other, to
make a complete circle. Homeostasis occurs along the diameter of the
circle, at the border between the two semicircles. At homoeostasis,
normal calcium levels are 10 milligrams per deciliter. The upper
semicircle represents the mechanism that reduces elevated calcium levels
in the blood when the levels are too high. First, the thyroid gland
releases calcitonin. Calcitonin activity inhibits osteoclasts and
decreases the reabsorption of calcium ions in the kidney. These two
actions cause calcium ion levels in the blood to drop back to
homeostasis. The lower semicircle represents the mechanisms that
increase calcium levels in the blood when the levels are too low. First,
the parathyroid glands release PTH. PTH stimulates osteoclast activity,
causing calcium ions to be released from bone. PTH also increases the
reabsorption of calcium by the kidney. In addition, PTH also increases
calcium absorption in the small intestines via Vitamin D synthesis.
These three actions cause calcium ion levels in the blood to increase.">
![In this illustration, the two mechanisms that maintain calcium
homeostasis are shown as two semicircles that are combined, one on top
of each other, to make a complete circle. Homeostasis occurs along the
diameter of the circle, at the border between the two semicircles. At
homoeostasis, normal calcium levels are 10 milligrams per deciliter. The
upper semicircle represents the mechanism that reduces elevated calcium
levels in the blood when the levels are too high. First, the thyroid
gland releases calcitonin. Calcitonin activity inhibits osteoclasts and
decreases the reabsorption of calcium ions in the kidney. These two
actions cause calcium ion levels in the blood to drop back to
homeostasis. The lower semicircle represents the mechanisms that
increase calcium levels in the blood when the levels are too low. First,
the parathyroid glands release PTH. PTH stimulates osteoclast activity,
causing calcium ions to be released from bone. PTH also increases the
reabsorption of calcium by the kidney. In addition, PTH also increases
calcium absorption in the small intestines via Vitamin D synthesis.
These three actions cause calcium ion levels in the blood to
increase.](../resources/625_Calcium_Homeostasis.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="420"} </span>
</figure>
Calcium is a chemical element that cannot be produced by any biological
processes. The only way it can enter the body is through the diet. The
bones act as a storage site for calcium: The body deposits calcium in
the bones when blood levels get too high, and it releases calcium when
blood levels drop too low. This process is regulated by PTH, vitamin D,
and calcitonin.
{: #fs-id1977482}

Cells of the parathyroid gland have plasma membrane receptors for
calcium. When calcium is not binding to these receptors, the cells
release PTH, which stimulates osteoclast proliferation and resorption of
bone by osteoclasts. This demineralization process releases calcium into
the blood. PTH promotes reabsorption of calcium from the urine by the
kidneys, so that the calcium returns to the blood. Finally, PTH
stimulates the synthesis of vitamin D, which in turn, stimulates calcium
absorption from any digested food in the small intestine.
{: #fs-id1258841}

When all these processes return blood calcium levels to normal, there is
enough calcium to bind with the receptors on the surface of the cells of
the parathyroid glands, and this cycle of events is turned off
([\[link\]](#fig-ch06_07_01){: .autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id1662382}

When blood levels of calcium get too high, the thyroid gland is
stimulated to release calcitonin ([\[link\]](#fig-ch06_07_01){:
.autogenerated-content}), which inhibits osteoclast activity and
stimulates calcium uptake by the bones, but also decreases reabsorption
of calcium by the kidneys. All of these actions lower blood levels of
calcium. When blood calcium levels return to normal, the thyroid gland
stops secreting calcitonin.
{: #fs-id1569683}

<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1026742" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

Calcium homeostasis, i.e., maintaining a blood calcium level of about 10
mg/dL, is critical for normal body functions. Hypocalcemia can result in
problems with blood coagulation, muscle contraction, nerve functioning,
and bone strength. Hypercalcemia can result in lethargy, sluggish
reflexes, constipation and loss of appetite, confusion, and coma.
Calcium homeostasis is controlled by PTH, vitamin D, and calcitonin and
the interactions of the skeletal, endocrine, digestive, and urinary
systems.
{: #fs-id1016222}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1180511" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1284795">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1527934" markdown="1">
When calcium levels are too high or too low, which body system is
primarily affected?
{: #fs-id773871}

1.  skeletal system
2.  endocrine system
3.  digestive system
4.  nervous system
{: #fs-id745922 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id755495" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id715732}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1829377">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id813284" markdown="1">
All of the following play a role in calcium homeostasis except
{: #fs-id1955702}

1.  thyroxine
2.  calcitonin
3.  parathyroid hormone
4.  vitamin D
{: #fs-id969608 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1180259" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id1307615}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1804706">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1527635" markdown="1">
Which of the following is most likely to be released when blood calcium
levels are elevated?
{: #fs-id1554234}

1.  thyroxine
2.  calcitonin
3.  parathyroid hormone
4.  vitamin D
{: #fs-id756751 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1812183" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id1864573}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1954104" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1739710">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1127823" markdown="1">
An individual with very low levels of vitamin D presents themselves to
you complaining of seemingly fragile bones. Explain how these might be
connected.
{: #fs-id1752375}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1554131" data-label="" markdown="1">
Vitamin D is required for calcium absorption by the gut. Low vitamin D
could lead to insufficient levels of calcium in the blood so the calcium
is being released from the bones. The reduction of calcium from the
bones can make them weak and subject to fracture.
{: #fs-id1437036}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1640031">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1201067" markdown="1">
Describe the effects caused when the parathyroid gland fails to respond
to calcium bound to its receptors.
{: #fs-id1527677}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1968878" data-label="" markdown="1">
Under “normal” conditions, receptors in the parathyroid glands bind
blood calcium. When the receptors are full, the parathyroid gland stops
secreting PTH. In the condition described, the parathyroid glands are
not responding to the signal that there is sufficient calcium in the
blood and they keep releasing PTH, which causes the bone to release more
calcium into the blood. Ultimately, the bones become fragile and
hypercalcemia can result.
{: #fs-id1484999}

</div>
</div>
</section>



