---
title: Introduction
layout: page
---

<?cnx.eoc
  class="summary" title="Chapter Review"?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="interactive-exercise" title="Interactive Link Questions"?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="multiple-choice" title="Review Questions" ?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="free-response" title="Critical Thinking Questions"?>

<figure id="fig-ch08_00_01" class="splash">
<div data-type="title">
Dancer
</div>
<figcaption>
The appendicular skeleton consists of the upper and lower limb bones,
the bones of the hands and feet, and the bones that anchor the limbs to
the axial skeleton. (credit: Melissa Dooley/flickr)
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2240637" data-alt="This photograph
shows a dancer striking a pose."> ![This photograph shows a dancer
striking a pose.](../resources/800_Dancer.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="500"} </span>
</figure>
<div data-type="note" id="eip-735" class="chapter-objectives" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Chapter Objectives
</div>
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
{: #eip-id7865711}

* Discuss the bones of the pectoral and pelvic girdles, and describe how
  these unite the limbs with the axial skeleton
* Describe the bones of the upper limb, including the bones of the arm,
  forearm, wrist, and hand
* Identify the features of the pelvis and explain how these differ
  between the adult male and female pelvis
* Describe the bones of the lower limb, including the bones of the
  thigh, leg, ankle, and foot
* Describe the embryonic formation and growth of the limb bones
{: #eip-id7839067}

</div>
Your skeleton provides the internal supporting structure of the body.
The adult axial skeleton consists of 80 bones that form the head and
body trunk. Attached to this are the limbs, whose 126 bones constitute
the appendicular skeleton. These bones are divided into two groups: the
bones that are located within the limbs themselves, and the girdle bones
that attach the limbs to the axial skeleton. The bones of the shoulder
region form the pectoral girdle, which anchors the upper limb to the
thoracic cage of the axial skeleton. The lower limb is attached to the
vertebral column by the pelvic girdle.
{: #fs-id1350636}

Because of our upright stance, different functional demands are placed
upon the upper and lower limbs. Thus, the bones of the lower limbs are
adapted for weight-bearing support and stability, as well as for body
locomotion via walking or running. In contrast, our upper limbs are not
required for these functions. Instead, our upper limbs are highly mobile
and can be utilized for a wide variety of activities. The large range of
upper limb movements, coupled with the ability to easily manipulate
objects with our hands and opposable thumbs, has allowed humans to
construct the modern world in which we live.
{: #fs-id1928302}




