---
title: Adjustments of the Infant at Birth and Postnatal Stages
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Discuss the importance of an infant’s first breath
* Explain the closing of the cardiac shunts
* Describe thermoregulation in the newborn
* Summarize the importance of intestinal flora in the newborn

</div>
From a fetal perspective, the process of birth is a crisis. In the womb,
the fetus was snuggled in a soft, warm, dark, and quiet world. The
placenta provided nutrition and oxygen continuously. Suddenly, the
contractions of labor and vaginal childbirth forcibly squeeze the fetus
through the birth canal, limiting oxygenated blood flow during
contractions and shifting the skull bones to accommodate the small
space. After birth, the newborn’s system must make drastic adjustments
to a world that is colder, brighter, and louder, and where he or she
will experience hunger and thirst. The neonatal period (neo- = “new”;
-natal = “birth”) spans the first to the thirtieth day of life outside
of the uterus.
{: #fs-id1748169}

<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1350454" markdown="1">
# Respiratory Adjustments
{: data-type="title"}

Although the fetus “practices” breathing by inhaling amniotic fluid in
utero, there is no air in the uterus and thus no true opportunity to
breathe. (There is also no need to breathe because the placenta supplies
the fetus with all the oxygenated blood it needs.) During gestation, the
partially collapsed lungs are filled with amniotic fluid and exhibit
very little metabolic activity. Several factors stimulate newborns to
take their first breath at birth. First, labor contractions temporarily
constrict umbilical blood vessels, reducing oxygenated blood flow to the
fetus and elevating carbon dioxide levels in the blood. High carbon
dioxide levels cause acidosis and stimulate the respiratory center in
the brain, triggering the newborn to take a breath.
{: #fs-id2068717}

The first breath typically is taken within 10 seconds of birth, after
mucus is aspirated from the infant’s mouth and nose. The first breaths
inflate the lungs to nearly full capacity and dramatically decrease lung
pressure and resistance to blood flow, causing a major circulatory
reconfiguration. Pulmonary alveoli open, and alveolar capillaries fill
with blood. Amniotic fluid in the lungs drains or is absorbed, and the
lungs immediately take over the task of the placenta, exchanging carbon
dioxide for oxygen by the process of respiration.
{: #fs-id1984738}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2166108" markdown="1">
# Circulatory Adjustments
{: data-type="title"}

The process of clamping and cutting the umbilical cord collapses the
umbilical blood vessels. In the absence of medical assistance, this
occlusion would occur naturally within 20 minutes of birth because the
Wharton’s jelly within the umbilical cord would swell in response to the
lower temperature outside of the mother’s body, and the blood vessels
would constrict. Natural occlusion has occurred when the umbilical cord
is no longer pulsating. For the most part, the collapsed vessels atrophy
and become fibrotic remnants, existing in the mature circulatory system
as ligaments of the abdominal wall and liver. The ductus venosus
degenerates to become the ligamentum venosum beneath the liver. Only the
proximal sections of the two umbilical arteries remain functional,
taking on the role of supplying blood to the upper part of the bladder
([\[link\]](#fig-ch29_05_01){: .autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id2309996}

<figure id="fig-ch29_05_01">
<div data-type="title">
Neonatal Circulatory System
</div>
<figcaption>
A newborn’s circulatory system reconfigures immediately after birth. The
three fetal shunts have been closed permanently, facilitating blood flow
to the liver and lungs.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2129906" data-alt="This figure
illustrates the circulatory system in a newborn. The left image in both
panels shows the blood circulation before birth and the right image
shows the blood circulation after birth."> ![This figure illustrates the
circulatory system in a newborn. The left image in both panels shows the
blood circulation before birth and the right image shows the blood
circulation after
birth.](../resources/2921_Neonatal_Circulatory_System.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="500"} </span>
</figure>
The newborn’s first breath is vital to initiate the transition from the
fetal to the neonatal circulatory pattern. Inflation of the lungs
decreases blood pressure throughout the pulmonary system, as well as in
the right atrium and ventricle. In response to this pressure change, the
flow of blood temporarily reverses direction through the foramen ovale,
moving from the left to the right atrium, and blocking the shunt with
two flaps of tissue. Within 1 year, the tissue flaps usually fuse over
the shunt, turning the foramen ovale into the fossa ovalis. The ductus
arteriosus constricts as a result of increased oxygen concentration, and
becomes the ligamentum arteriosum. Closing of the ductus arteriosus
ensures that all blood pumped to the pulmonary circuit will be
oxygenated by the newly functional neonatal lungs.
{: #fs-id2279371}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1411660" markdown="1">
# Thermoregulatory Adjustments
{: data-type="title"}

The fetus floats in warm amniotic fluid that is maintained at a
temperature of approximately 98.6°F with very little fluctuation. Birth
exposes newborns to a cooler environment in which they have to regulate
their own body temperature. Newborns have a higher ratio of surface area
to volume than adults. This means that their body has less volume
throughout which to produce heat, and more surface area from which to
lose heat. As a result, newborns produce heat more slowly and lose it
more quickly. Newborns also have immature musculature that limits their
ability to generate heat by shivering. Moreover, their nervous systems
are underdeveloped, so they cannot quickly constrict superficial blood
vessels in response to cold. They also have little subcutaneous fat for
insulation. All these factors make it harder for newborns to maintain
their body temperature.
{: #fs-id1380846}

Newborns, however, do have a special method for generating heat: <span
data-type="term">nonshivering thermogenesis</span>, which involves the
breakdown of <span data-type="term">brown adipose tissue</span>, or
brown fat, which is distributed over the back, chest, and shoulders.
Brown fat differs from the more familiar white fat in two ways:
{: #fs-id2093829}

* It is highly vascularized. This allows for faster delivery of oxygen,
  which leads to faster cellular respiration.
* It is packed with a special type of mitochondria that are able to
  engage in cellular respiration reactions that produce less ATP and
  more heat than standard cellular respiration reactions.
{: #fs-id2338232}

The breakdown of brown fat occurs automatically upon exposure to cold,
so it is an important heat regulator in newborns. During fetal
development, the placenta secretes inhibitors that prevent metabolism of
brown adipose fat and promote its accumulation in preparation for birth.
{: #fs-id2336432}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2607367" markdown="1">
# Gastrointestinal and Urinary Adjustments
{: data-type="title"}

In adults, the gastrointestinal tract harbors bacterial flora—trillions
of bacteria that aid in digestion, produce vitamins, and protect from
the invasion or replication of pathogens. In stark contrast, the fetal
intestine is sterile. The first consumption of breast milk or formula
floods the neonatal gastrointestinal tract with beneficial bacteria that
begin to establish the bacterial flora.
{: #fs-id2101775}

The fetal kidneys filter blood and produce urine, but the neonatal
kidneys are still immature and inefficient at concentrating urine.
Therefore, newborns produce very dilute urine, making it particularly
important for infants to obtain sufficient fluids from breast milk or
formula.
{: #fs-id2045032}

</section>
<div data-type="note" id="fs-id2147698" class="anatomy homeostatic" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Homeostatic Imbalances
</div>
<span data-type="title">Homeostasis in the Newborn: Apgar Score</span>
In the minutes following birth, a newborn must undergo dramatic systemic
changes to be able to survive outside the womb. An obstetrician,
midwife, or nurse can estimate how well a newborn is doing by obtaining
an Apgar score. The Apgar score was introduced in 1952 by the
anesthesiologist Dr. Virginia Apgar as a method to assess the effects on
the newborn of anesthesia given to the laboring mother. Healthcare
providers now use it to assess the general wellbeing of the newborn,
whether or not analgesics or anesthetics were used.
{: #fs-id2230252}

Five criteria—skin color, heart rate, reflex, muscle tone, and
respiration—are assessed, and each criterion is assigned a score of 0,
1, or 2. Scores are taken at 1 minute after birth and again at 5 minutes
after birth. Each time that scores are taken, the five scores are added
together. High scores (out of a possible 10) indicate the baby has made
the transition from the womb well, whereas lower scores indicate that
the baby may be in distress.
{: #fs-id2293668}

The technique for determining an Apgar score is quick and easy, painless
for the newborn, and does not require any instruments except for a
stethoscope. A convenient way to remember the five scoring criteria is
to apply the mnemonic APGAR, for “appearance” (skin color), “pulse”
(heart rate), “grimace” (reflex), “activity” (muscle tone), and
“respiration.”
{: #fs-id1549196}

Of the five Apgar criteria, heart rate and respiration are the most
critical. Poor scores for either of these measurements may indicate the
need for immediate medical attention to resuscitate or stabilize the
newborn. In general, any score lower than 7 at the 5-minute mark
indicates that medical assistance may be needed. A total score below 5
indicates an emergency situation. Normally, a newborn will get an
intermediate score of 1 for some of the Apgar criteria and will progress
to a 2 by the 5-minute assessment. Scores of 8 or above are normal.
{: #fs-id2131868}

</div>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1952798" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

The first breath a newborn takes at birth inflates the lungs and
dramatically alters the circulatory system, closing the three shunts
that directed oxygenated blood away from the lungs and liver during
fetal life. Clamping and cutting the umbilical cord collapses the three
umbilical blood vessels. The proximal umbilical arteries remain a part
of the circulatory system, whereas the distal umbilical arteries and the
umbilical vein become fibrotic. The newborn keeps warm by breaking down
brown adipose tissue in the process of nonshivering thermogenesis. The
first consumption of breast milk or formula floods the newborn’s sterile
gastrointestinal tract with beneficial bacteria that eventually
establish themselves as the bacterial flora, which aid in digestion.
{: #fs-id2306645}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2500526" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id810682">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2279309" markdown="1">
Which of these shunts exists between the right and left atria?
{: #fs-id1472712}

1.  foramen ovale
2.  ductus venosus
3.  ductus arteriosis
4.  foramen venosus
{: #fs-id2242045 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1291062" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id2269834}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1390282">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1960629" markdown="1">
Why is brown fat important?
{: #fs-id2283078}

1.  It is the newborn’s primary source of insulation.
2.  It can be broken down to generate heat for thermoregulation.
3.  It can be broken down for energy between feedings.
4.  It can be converted to white fat.
{: #fs-id2025531 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1865942" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id2337819}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2320232">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2250710" markdown="1">
Constriction of umbilical blood vessels during vaginal birth ________.
{: #fs-id2250662}

1.  causes respiratory alkalosis
2.  inhibits the respiratory center in the brain
3.  elevates carbon dioxide levels in the blood
4.  both a and b
{: #fs-id1950482 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1282535" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id2291722}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1376072" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2095844">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2345954" markdown="1">
Describe how the newborn’s first breath alters the circulatory pattern.
{: #fs-id2311187}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1689305" data-label="" markdown="1">
The first breath inflates the lungs, which drops blood pressure
throughout the pulmonary system, as well as in the right atrium and
ventricle. In response to this pressure change, the flow of blood
temporarily reverses direction through the foramen ovale, moving from
the left to the right atrium, and blocking the shunt with two flaps of
tissue. The increased oxygen concentration also constricts the ductus
arteriosus, ensuring that these shunts no longer prevent blood from
reaching the lungs to be oxygenated.
{: #fs-id1353039}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2031316">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1469126" markdown="1">
Newborns are at much higher risk for dehydration than adults. Why?
{: #fs-id1918306}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2302722" data-label="" markdown="1">
The newborn’s kidneys are immature and inefficient at concentrating
urine. Therefore, newborns produce very dilute urine—in a sense, wasting
fluid. This increases their risk for dehydration, and makes it critical
that caregivers provide newborns with enough fluid, especially during
bouts of vomiting or diarrhea.
{: #fs-id2063200}

</div>
</div>
</section>



