---
title: Lactation
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Describe the structure of the lactating breast
* Summarize the process of lactation
* Explain how the composition of breast milk changes during the first
  days of lactation and in the course of a single feeding

</div>
<span data-type="term">Lactation</span> is the process by which milk is
synthesized and secreted from the mammary glands of the postpartum
female breast in response to an infant sucking at the nipple. Breast
milk provides ideal nutrition and passive immunity for the infant,
encourages mild uterine contractions to return the uterus to its
pre-pregnancy size (i.e., involution), and induces a substantial
metabolic increase in the mother, consuming the fat reserves stored
during pregnancy.
{: #fs-id2797558}

<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1962211" markdown="1">
# Structure of the Lactating Breast
{: data-type="title"}

Mammary glands are modified sweat glands. The non-pregnant and
non-lactating female breast is composed primarily of adipose and
collagenous tissue, with mammary glands making up a very minor
proportion of breast volume. The mammary gland is composed of
milk-transporting lactiferous ducts, which expand and branch extensively
during pregnancy in response to estrogen, growth hormone, cortisol, and
prolactin. Moreover, in response to progesterone, clusters of breast
alveoli bud from the ducts and expand outward toward the chest wall.
Breast alveoli are balloon-like structures lined with milk-secreting
cuboidal cells, or lactocytes, that are surrounded by a net of
contractile myoepithelial cells. Milk is secreted from the lactocytes,
fills the alveoli, and is squeezed into the ducts. Clusters of alveoli
that drain to a common duct are called lobules; the lactating female has
12–20 lobules organized radially around the nipple. Milk drains from
lactiferous ducts into lactiferous sinuses that meet at 4 to 18
perforations in the nipple, called nipple pores. The small bumps of the
areola (the darkened skin around the nipple) are called Montgomery
glands. They secrete oil to cleanse the nipple opening and prevent
chapping and cracking of the nipple during breastfeeding.
{: #fs-id2142783}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2110788" markdown="1">
# The Process of Lactation
{: data-type="title"}

The pituitary hormone <span data-type="term">prolactin</span> is
instrumental in the establishment and maintenance of breast milk supply.
It also is important for the mobilization of maternal micronutrients for
breast milk.
{: #fs-id2023470}

Near the fifth week of pregnancy, the level of circulating prolactin
begins to increase, eventually rising to approximately 10–20 times the
pre-pregnancy concentration. We noted earlier that, during pregnancy,
prolactin and other hormones prepare the breasts anatomically for the
secretion of milk. The level of prolactin plateaus in late pregnancy, at
a level high enough to initiate milk production. However, estrogen,
progesterone, and other placental hormones inhibit prolactin-mediated
milk synthesis during pregnancy. It is not until the placenta is
expelled that this inhibition is lifted and milk production commences.
{: #fs-id2306035}

After childbirth, the baseline prolactin level drops sharply, but it is
restored for a 1-hour spike during each feeding to stimulate the
production of milk for the next feeding. With each prolactin spike,
estrogen and progesterone also increase slightly.
{: #fs-id1289845}

When the infant suckles, sensory nerve fibers in the areola trigger a
neuroendocrine reflex that results in milk secretion from lactocytes
into the alveoli. The posterior pituitary releases oxytocin, which
stimulates myoepithelial cells to squeeze milk from the alveoli so it
can drain into the lactiferous ducts, collect in the lactiferous
sinuses, and discharge through the nipple pores. It takes less than 1
minute from the time when an infant begins suckling (the latent period)
until milk is secreted (the let-down). [\[link\]](#fig-ch29_06_01){:
.autogenerated-content} summarizes the positive feedback loop of the
<span data-type="term">let-down reflex</span>.
{: #fs-id1636266}

<figure id="fig-ch29_06_01">
<div data-type="title">
Let-Down Reflex
</div>
<figcaption>
A positive feedback loop ensures continued milk production as long as
the infant continues to breastfeed.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1895105" data-alt="This figure shows
the process of let down reflex, the process in which the brain receives
sensory impulses to release the hormones necessary for producing and
discharging milk to the suckling newborn."> ![This figure shows the
process of let down reflex, the process in which the brain receives
sensory impulses to release the hormones necessary for producing and
discharging milk to the suckling
newborn.](../resources/2922_Let_Down_Reflex-new.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="550"} </span>
</figure>
The prolactin-mediated synthesis of milk changes with time. Frequent
milk removal by breastfeeding (or pumping) will maintain high
circulating prolactin levels for several months. However, even with
continued breastfeeding, baseline prolactin will decrease over time to
its pre-pregnancy level. In addition to prolactin and oxytocin, growth
hormone, cortisol, parathyroid hormone, and insulin contribute to
lactation, in part by facilitating the transport of maternal amino
acids, fatty acids, glucose, and calcium to breast milk.
{: #fs-id1291591}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1277236" markdown="1">
# Changes in the Composition of Breast Milk
{: data-type="title"}

In the final weeks of pregnancy, the alveoli swell with <span
data-type="term">colostrum</span>, a thick, yellowish substance that is
high in protein but contains less fat and glucose than mature breast
milk ([\[link\]](#tbl-ch29_03){: .autogenerated-content}). Before
childbirth, some women experience leakage of colostrum from the nipples.
In contrast, mature breast milk does not leak during pregnancy and is
not secreted until several days after childbirth.
{: #fs-id2301864}

<table id="tbl-ch29_03" summary=""><caption>*Cow’s milk should never be given to an infant. Its composition is not suitable and its proteins are difficult for the infant to digest.</caption><thead> <tr><th colspan="4">Compositions of Human Colostrum, Mature Breast Milk, and Cow’s Milk (g/L)</th></tr> <tr> <th /> <th>Human colostrum</th> <th>Human breast milk</th> <th>Cow’s milk*</th> </tr> </thead><tbody> <tr> <td><strong data-effect="bold">Total protein</strong></td> <td>23</td> <td>11</td> <td>31</td> </tr> <tr> <td><strong data-effect="bold">Immunoglobulins</strong></td> <td>19</td> <td>0.1</td> <td>1</td> </tr> <tr> <td><strong data-effect="bold">Fat</strong></td> <td>30</td> <td>45</td> <td>38</td> </tr> <tr> <td><strong data-effect="bold">Lactose</strong></td> <td>57</td> <td>71</td> <td>47</td> </tr> <tr> <td><strong data-effect="bold">Calcium</strong></td> <td>0.5</td> <td>0.3</td> <td>1.4</td> </tr> <tr> <td><strong data-effect="bold">Phosphorus</strong></td> <td>0.16</td> <td>0.14</td> <td>0.90</td> </tr> <tr> <td><strong data-effect="bold">Sodium</strong></td> <td>0.50</td> <td>0.15</td> <td>0.41</td> </tr> </tbody></table>
Colostrum is secreted during the first 48–72 hours postpartum. Only a
small volume of colostrum is produced—approximately 3 ounces in a
24-hour period—but it is sufficient for the newborn in the first few
days of life. Colostrum is rich with immunoglobulins, which confer
gastrointestinal, and also likely systemic, immunity as the newborn
adjusts to a nonsterile environment.
{: #fs-id2339243}

After about the third postpartum day, the mother secretes transitional
milk that represents an intermediate between mature milk and colostrum.
This is followed by mature milk from approximately postpartum day 10
(see [\[link\]](#tbl-ch29_03){: .autogenerated-content}). As you can see
in the accompanying table, cow’s milk is not a substitute for breast
milk. It contains less lactose, less fat, and more protein and minerals.
Moreover, the proteins in cow’s milk are difficult for an infant’s
immature digestive system to metabolize and absorb.
{: #fs-id2094541}

The first few weeks of breastfeeding may involve leakage, soreness, and
periods of milk engorgement as the relationship between milk supply and
infant demand becomes established. Once this period is complete, the
mother will produce approximately 1.5 liters of milk per day for a
single infant, and more if she has twins or triplets. As the infant goes
through growth spurts, the milk supply constantly adjusts to accommodate
changes in demand. A woman can continue to lactate for years, but once
breastfeeding is stopped for approximately 1 week, any remaining milk
will be reabsorbed; in most cases, no more will be produced, even if
suckling or pumping is resumed.
{: #fs-id1472722}

Mature milk changes from the beginning to the end of a feeding. The
early milk, called <span data-type="term">foremilk</span>, is watery,
translucent, and rich in lactose and protein. Its purpose is to quench
the infant’s thirst. <span data-type="term">Hindmilk</span> is delivered
toward the end of a feeding. It is opaque, creamy, and rich in fat, and
serves to satisfy the infant’s appetite.
{: #fs-id2202983}

During the first days of a newborn’s life, it is important for meconium
to be cleared from the intestines and for bilirubin to be kept low in
the circulation. Recall that bilirubin, a product of erythrocyte
breakdown, is processed by the liver and secreted in bile. It enters the
gastrointestinal tract and exits the body in the stool. Breast milk has
laxative properties that help expel meconium from the intestines and
clear bilirubin through the excretion of bile. A high concentration of
bilirubin in the blood causes jaundice. Some degree of jaundice is
normal in newborns, but a high level of bilirubin—which is
neurotoxic—can cause brain damage. Newborns, who do not yet have a fully
functional blood–brain barrier, are highly vulnerable to the bilirubin
circulating in the blood. Indeed, hyperbilirubinemia, a high level of
circulating bilirubin, is the most common condition requiring medical
attention in newborns. Newborns with hyperbilirubinemia are treated with
phototherapy because UV light helps to break down the bilirubin quickly.
{: #fs-id2153019}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1988575" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

The lactating mother supplies all the hydration and nutrients that a
growing infant needs for the first 4–6 months of life. During pregnancy,
the body prepares for lactation by stimulating the growth and
development of branching lactiferous ducts and alveoli lined with
milk-secreting lactocytes, and by creating colostrum. These functions
are attributable to the actions of several hormones, including
prolactin. Following childbirth, suckling triggers oxytocin release,
which stimulates myoepithelial cells to squeeze milk from alveoli.
Breast milk then drains toward the nipple pores to be consumed by the
infant. Colostrum, the milk produced in the first postpartum days,
provides immunoglobulins that increase the newborn’s immune defenses.
Colostrum, transitional milk, and mature breast milk are ideally suited
to each stage of the newborn’s development, and breastfeeding helps the
newborn’s digestive system expel meconium and clear bilirubin. Mature
milk changes from the beginning to the end of a feeding. Foremilk
quenches the infant’s thirst, whereas hindmilk satisfies the infant’s
appetite.
{: #fs-id2298128}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2302322" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1483979">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1328420" markdown="1">
Alveoli are connected to the lactiferous sinuses by ________.
{: #fs-id1414099}

1.  lactocytes
2.  lactiferous ducts
3.  nipple pores
4.  lobules
{: #fs-id1724224 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1706986" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id1472292}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2348104">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2142130" markdown="1">
How is colostrum most important to a newborn?
{: #fs-id1479943}

1.  It helps boost the newborn’s immune system.
2.  It provides much needed fat.
3.  It satisfies the newborn’s thirst.
4.  It satisfies the infant’s appetite.
{: #fs-id1689305 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2524252" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id2113086}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2242284">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1956613" markdown="1">
Mature breast milk ________.
{: #fs-id2321063}

1.  has more sodium than cow’s milk
2.  has more calcium than cow’s milk
3.  has more protein than cow’s milk
4.  has more fat than cow’s milk
{: #fs-id2079809 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1370137" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id1415061}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2336852" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2444175">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1751418" markdown="1">
Describe the transit of breast milk from lactocytes to nipple pores.
{: #fs-id1389490}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2344779" data-label="" markdown="1">
Milk is secreted by lactocytes into alveoli. Suckling stimulates the
contraction of myoepithelial cells that squeeze milk into lactiferous
ducts. It then collects in lactiferous sinuses and is secreted through
the nipple pores.
{: #fs-id2252064}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1652582">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1640136" markdown="1">
A woman who stopped breastfeeding suddenly is experiencing breast
engorgement and leakage, just like she did in the first few weeks of
breastfeeding. Why?
{: #fs-id1605143}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1761499" data-label="" markdown="1">
It takes time to establish a balance between milk supply and milk
demand. When breastfeeding stops abruptly, it takes time for the supply
to fall. Excessive milk supply creates breast engorgement and leakage.
{: #fs-id1765363}

</div>
</div>
</section>



