---
title: "Exercise, Nutrition, Hormones, and Bone Tissue"
layout: page
tags: debug
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
* Describe the effect exercise has on bone tissue
* List the nutrients that affect bone health
* Discuss the role those nutrients play in bone health
* Describe the effects of hormones on bone tissue

</div>
All of the organ systems of your body are interdependent, and the
skeletal system is no exception. The food you take in via your digestive
system and the hormones secreted by your endocrine system affect your
bones. Even using your muscles to engage in exercise has an impact on
your bones.

# Exercise and Bone Tissue

During long space missions, astronauts can lose approximately 1 to 2
percent of their bone mass per month. This loss of bone mass is thought
to be caused by the lack of mechanical stress on astronauts’ bones due
to the low gravitational forces in space. Lack of mechanical stress
causes bones to lose mineral salts and collagen fibers, and thus
strength. Similarly, mechanical stress stimulates the deposition of
mineral salts and collagen fibers. The internal and external structure
of a bone will change as stress increases or decreases so that the bone
is an ideal size and weight for the amount of activity it endures. That
is why people who exercise regularly have thicker bones than people who
are more sedentary. It is also why a broken bone in a cast atrophies
while its contralateral mate maintains its concentration of mineral
salts and collagen fibers. The bones undergo remodeling as a result of
forces (or lack of forces) placed on them.

Numerous, controlled studies have demonstrated that people who exercise
regularly have greater bone density than those who are more sedentary.
Any type of exercise will stimulate the deposition of more bone tissue,
but resistance training has a greater effect than cardiovascular
activities. Resistance training is especially important to slow down the
eventual bone loss due to aging and for preventing osteoporosis.

# Nutrition and Bone Tissue

The vitamins and minerals contained in all of the food we consume are
important for all of our organ systems. However, there are certain
nutrients that affect bone health.

## Calcium and Vitamin D

You already know that calcium is a critical component of bone,
especially in the form of calcium phosphate and calcium carbonate. Since
the body cannot make calcium, it must be obtained from the diet.
However, calcium cannot be absorbed from the small intestine without
vitamin D. Therefore, intake of vitamin D is also critical to bone
health. In addition to vitamin D’s role in calcium absorption, it also
plays a role, though not as clearly understood, in bone remodeling.

Milk and other dairy foods are not the only sources of calcium. This
important nutrient is also found in green leafy vegetables, broccoli,
and intact salmon and canned sardines with their soft bones. Nuts,
beans, seeds, and shellfish provide calcium in smaller quantities.

Except for fatty fish like salmon and tuna, or fortified milk or cereal,
vitamin D is not found naturally in many foods. The action of sunlight
on the skin triggers the body to produce its own vitamin D
([\[link\]](#fig-ch06_06_01){: .autogenerated-content}), but many
people, especially those of darker complexion and those living in
northern latitudes where the sun’s rays are not as strong, are deficient
in vitamin D. In cases of deficiency, a doctor can prescribe a vitamin D
supplement.

![This illustration resembles a flow chart. It begins with the sun shining on a silhouette of a man. One arrow leads from the sun to the man&#x2019;s skin, stating that Vitamin D is manufactured in the skin after the absorption of sunlight. Another arrow points into the man&#x2019;s mouth and states that Vitamin D is ingested through food and supplements, absorbed by the intestines, and carried to the liver via the bloodstream. A call out of the liver states that, in the liver, Vitamin D turns into 25 (OH) D, also known as calcidiol, the primary form of circulating Vitamin D. Another callout of the right kidney states that, in the kidneys, Vitamin D is transformed into 1 25 OH (D2). This is also known as calcitriol, a biologically active form of Vitamin D. The synthesis of Vitamin D facilitates calcium absorption from the small intestine, calcium re-absorption from the kidneys, and the rebuilding of bone tissue.](../resources/614_Synthesis_of_Vitamin_D.jpg "Sunlight is one source of vitamin D."){: #fig-ch06_06_01 data-media-type="image/jpg" data-title="Synthesis of Vitamin D "}

## Other Nutrients

Vitamin K also supports bone mineralization and may have a synergistic
role with vitamin D in the regulation of bone growth. Green leafy
vegetables are a good source of vitamin K.

The minerals magnesium and fluoride may also play a role in supporting
bone health. While magnesium is only found in trace amounts in the human
body, more than 60 percent of it is in the skeleton, suggesting it plays
a role in the structure of bone. Fluoride can displace the hydroxyl
group in bone’s hydroxyapatite crystals and form fluorapatite. Similar
to its effect on dental enamel, fluorapatite helps stabilize and
strengthen bone mineral. Fluoride can also enter spaces within
hydroxyapatite crystals, thus increasing their density.

Omega-3 fatty acids have long been known to reduce inflammation in
various parts of the body. Inflammation can interfere with the function
of osteoblasts, so consuming omega-3 fatty acids, in the diet or in
supplements, may also help enhance production of new osseous tissue.
[\[link\]](#tbl-ch06_05){: .autogenerated-content} summarizes the role
of nutrients in bone health.

<table id="tbl-ch06_05" summary=""><thead> <tr> <th colspan="2">Nutrients and Bone Health</th> </tr> <tr> <th>Nutrient</th> <th>Role in bone health</th> </tr> </thead><tbody> <tr><td>Calcium</td> <td>Needed to make calcium phosphate and calcium carbonate, which form the hydroxyapatite crystals that give bone its hardness</td></tr> <tr> <td>Vitamin D</td> <td>Needed for calcium absorption</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Vitamin K</td> <td>Supports bone mineralization; may have synergistic effect with vitamin D</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Magnesium</td> <td>Structural component of bone</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Fluoride</td> <td>Structural component of bone</td> </tr> <tr><td>Omega-3 fatty acids</td> <td>Reduces inflammation that may interfere with osteoblast function</td></tr> </tbody></table># Hormones and Bone Tissue

The endocrine system produces and secretes hormones, many of which
interact with the skeletal system. These hormones are involved in
controlling bone growth, maintaining bone once it is formed, and
remodeling it.

## Hormones That Influence Osteoblasts and/or Maintain the Matrix

Several hormones are necessary for controlling bone growth and
maintaining the bone matrix. The pituitary gland secretes growth hormone
(GH), which, as its name implies, controls bone growth in several ways.
It triggers chondrocyte proliferation in epiphyseal plates, resulting in
the increasing length of long bones. GH also increases calcium
retention, which enhances mineralization, and stimulates osteoblastic
activity, which improves bone density.

GH is not alone in stimulating bone growth and maintaining osseous
tissue. Thyroxine, a hormone secreted by the thyroid gland promotes
osteoblastic activity and the synthesis of bone matrix. During puberty,
the sex hormones (estrogen in girls, testosterone in boys) also come
into play. They too promote osteoblastic activity and production of bone
matrix, and in addition, are responsible for the growth spurt that often
occurs during adolescence. They also promote the conversion of the
epiphyseal plate to the epiphyseal line (i.e., cartilage to its bony
remnant), thus bringing an end to the longitudinal growth of bones.
Additionally, calcitriol, the active form of vitamin D, is produced by
the kidneys and stimulates the absorption of calcium and phosphate from
the digestive tract.

<div data-type="note" class="anatomy aging" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Aging and the…
</div>
<span data-type="title">Skeletal System</span> <span
data-type="term">Osteoporosis</span> is a disease characterized by a
decrease in bone mass that occurs when the rate of bone resorption
exceeds the rate of bone formation, a common occurrence as the body
ages. Notice how this is different from Paget’s disease. In Paget’s
disease, new bone is formed in an attempt to keep up with the resorption
by the overactive osteoclasts, but that new bone is produced
haphazardly. In fact, when a physician is evaluating a patient with
thinning bone, he or she will test for osteoporosis and Paget’s disease
(as well as other diseases). Osteoporosis does not have the elevated
blood levels of alkaline phosphatase found in Paget’s disease.

![This graph shows bone mass (total mass of skeletal calcium in grams)
on the Y axis. The Y axis scale goes from 0 up to 1500. The x axis
displays age in years from 0 to 100 years. Two plot lines are shown: a
blue line for males and a pink line for females. Male bone mass climbs
rapidly from 0 grams to 1500 grams between age 0 and age 25. Bone mass
then slowly drops to 1000 grams between age 25 and age 100. Female bone
loss climbs rapidly from 0 grams to about 1200 grams between age 0 and
age 28. Female bone mass then drops very slowly from 1200 grams to 1000
grams between age 29 and age 55. Bone mass then drops steeply from 1000
grams to 750 grams between ages 55 and 60. This is labeled on the graph
as bone loss due to menopause. After this steep drop, the female line
again levels somewhat, but still drops gradually, much like that of the
male. Between age 60 and age 100, female bone density drops from 750
grams to about 625 grams.](../resources/615_Age_and_Bone_Mass.jpg "Bone
density peaks at about 30 years of age. Women lose bone mass more
rapidly than men."){: #fig-ch06_06_02 data-media-type="image/jpg"
data-title="Graph Showing Relationship Between Age and Bone Mass "
data-z-for-sed=""}
While osteoporosis can involve any bone, it most commonly affects the
proximal ends of the femur, vertebrae, and wrist. As a result of the
loss of bone density, the osseous tissue may not provide adequate
support for everyday functions, and something as simple as a sneeze can
cause a vertebral fracture. When an elderly person falls and breaks a
hip (really, the femur), it is very likely the femur that broke first,
which resulted in the fall. Histologically, osteoporosis is
characterized by a reduction in the thickness of compact bone and the
number and size of trabeculae in cancellous bone.

[\[link\]](#fig-ch06_06_02){: .autogenerated-content} shows that women
lose bone mass more quickly than men starting at about 50 years of age.
This occurs because 50 is the approximate age at which women go through
menopause. Not only do their menstrual periods lessen and eventually
cease, but their ovaries reduce in size and then cease the production of
estrogen, a hormone that promotes osteoblastic activity and production
of bone matrix. Thus, osteoporosis is more common in women than in men,
but men can develop it, too. Anyone with a family history of
osteoporosis has a greater risk of developing the disease, so the best
treatment is prevention, which should start with a childhood diet that
includes adequate intake of calcium and vitamin D and a lifestyle that
includes weight-bearing exercise. These actions, as discussed above, are
important in building bone mass. Promoting proper nutrition and
weight-bearing exercise early in life can maximize bone mass before the
age of 30, thus reducing the risk of osteoporosis.

For many elderly people, a hip fracture can be life threatening. The
fracture itself may not be serious, but the immobility that comes during
the healing process can lead to the formation of blood clots that can
lodge in the capillaries of the lungs, resulting in respiratory failure;
pneumonia due to the lack of poor air exchange that accompanies
immobility; pressure sores (bed sores) that allow pathogens to enter the
body and cause infections; and urinary tract infections from
catheterization.

Current treatments for managing osteoporosis include bisphosphonates
(the same medications often used in Paget’s disease), calcitonin, and
estrogen (for women only). Minimizing the risk of falls, for example, by
removing tripping hazards, is also an important step in managing the
potential outcomes from the disease.

</div>

## Hormones That Influence Osteoclasts

Bone modeling and remodeling require osteoclasts to resorb unneeded,
damaged, or old bone, and osteoblasts to lay down new bone. Two hormones
that affect the osteoclasts are parathyroid hormone (PTH) and
calcitonin.

PTH stimulates osteoclast proliferation and activity. As a result,
calcium is released from the bones into the circulation, thus increasing
the calcium ion concentration in the blood. PTH also promotes the
reabsorption of calcium by the kidney tubules, which can affect calcium
homeostasis (see below).

The small intestine is also affected by PTH, albeit indirectly. Because
another function of PTH is to stimulate the synthesis of vitamin D, and
because vitamin D promotes intestinal absorption of calcium, PTH
indirectly increases calcium uptake by the small intestine. Calcitonin,
a hormone secreted by the thyroid gland, has some effects that
counteract those of PTH. Calcitonin inhibits osteoclast activity and
stimulates calcium uptake by the bones, thus reducing the concentration
of calcium ions in the blood. As evidenced by their opposing functions
in maintaining calcium homeostasis, PTH and calcitonin are generally
*not* secreted at the same time. [\[link\]](#tbl-ch06_06){:
.autogenerated-content} summarizes the hormones that influence the
skeletal system.

<table id="tbl-ch06_06" summary=""><thead> <tr> <th colspan="2">Hormones That Affect the Skeletal System</th> </tr> <tr> <th>Hormone</th> <th>Role</th> </tr> </thead><tbody> <tr> <td>Growth hormone</td> <td>Increases length of long bones, enhances mineralization, and improves bone density</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Thyroxine</td> <td>Stimulates bone growth and promotes synthesis of bone matrix</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Sex hormones</td> <td>Promote osteoblastic activity and production of bone matrix; responsible for adolescent growth spurt; promote conversion of epiphyseal plate to epiphyseal line</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Calcitriol</td> <td>Stimulates absorption of calcium and phosphate from digestive tract</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Parathyroid hormone</td> <td>Stimulates osteoclast proliferation and resorption of bone by osteoclasts; promotes reabsorption of calcium by kidney tubules; indirectly increases calcium absorption by small intestine</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Calcitonin</td> <td>Inhibits osteoclast activity and stimulates calcium uptake by bones</td> </tr> </tbody></table># Chapter Review

Mechanical stress stimulates the deposition of mineral salts and
collagen fibers within bones. Calcium, the predominant mineral in bone,
cannot be absorbed from the small intestine if vitamin D is lacking.
Vitamin K supports bone mineralization and may have a synergistic role
with vitamin D. Magnesium and fluoride, as structural elements, play a
supporting role in bone health. Omega-3 fatty acids reduce inflammation
and may promote production of new osseous tissue. Growth hormone
increases the length of long bones, enhances mineralization, and
improves bone density. Thyroxine stimulates bone growth and promotes the
synthesis of bone matrix. The sex hormones (estrogen in women;
testosterone in men) promote osteoblastic activity and the production of
bone matrix, are responsible for the adolescent growth spurt, and
promote closure of the epiphyseal plates. Osteoporosis is a disease
characterized by decreased bone mass that is common in aging adults.
Calcitriol stimulates the digestive tract to absorb calcium and
phosphate. Parathyroid hormone (PTH) stimulates osteoclast proliferation
and resorption of bone by osteoclasts. Vitamin D plays a synergistic
role with PTH in stimulating the osteoclasts. Additional functions of
PTH include promoting reabsorption of calcium by kidney tubules and
indirectly increasing calcium absorption from the small intestine.
Calcitonin inhibits osteoclast activity and stimulates calcium uptake by
bones.

# Review Questions

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Wolff’s law, which describes the effect of mechanical forces in bone
modeling/remodeling, would predict that ________

1.  a right-handed pitcher will have thicker bones in his right arm
    compared to his left.
2.  a right-handed cyclist will have thicker bones in her right leg
    compared to her left.
3.  a broken bone will heal thicker than it was before the fracture.
4.  a bed-ridden patient will have thicker bones than an athlete.
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
A

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Calcium cannot be absorbed from the small intestine if ________ is
lacking.

1.  vitamin D
2.  vitamin K
3.  calcitonin
4.  fluoride
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
A

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Which one of the following foods is best for bone health?

1.  carrots
2.  liver
3.  leafy green vegetables
4.  oranges
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
C

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Which of the following hormones are responsible for the adolescent
growth spurt?

1.  estrogen and testosterone
2.  calcitonin and calcitriol
3.  growth hormone and parathyroid hormone
4.  thyroxine and progesterone
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
A

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
With respect to their direct effects on osseous tissue, which pair of
hormones has actions that oppose each other?

1.  estrogen and testosterone
2.  calcitonin and calcitriol
3.  estrogen and progesterone
4.  calcitonin and parathyroid hormone
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
D

</div>
</div>

# Critical Thinking Questions

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
If you were a dietician who had a young female patient with a family
history of osteoporosis, what foods would you suggest she include in her
diet? Why?

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
Since maximum bone mass is achieved by age 30, I would want this patient
to have adequate calcium and vitamin D in her diet. To do this, I would
recommend ingesting milk and other dairy foods, green leafy vegetables,
and intact canned sardines so she receives sufficient calcium. Intact
salmon would be a good source for calcium and vitamin D. Other fatty
fish would also be a good vitamin D source.

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
During the early years of space exploration our astronauts, who had been
floating in space, would return to earth showing significant bone loss
dependent on how long they were in space. Discuss how this might happen
and what could be done to alleviate this condition.

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
Astronauts floating in space were not exerting significant pressure on
their bones; they were “weightless.” Without the force of gravity
exerting pressure on the bones, bone mass was lost. To alleviate this
condition, astronauts now do resistive exercise designed to apply forces
to the bones and thus help keep them healthy.

</div>
</div>

