---
title: The Thoracic Cage
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Discuss the components that make up the thoracic cage
* Identify the parts of the sternum and define the sternal angle
* Discuss the parts of a rib and rib classifications

</div>
The thoracic cage (rib cage) forms the thorax (chest) portion of the
body. It consists of the 12 pairs of ribs with their costal cartilages
and the sternum ([\[link\]](#fig-ch07_04_01){: .autogenerated-content}).
The ribs are anchored posteriorly to the 12 thoracic vertebrae (T1–T12).
The thoracic cage protects the heart and lungs.
{: #fs-id2464619}

<figure id="fig-ch07_04_01">
<div data-type="title">
Thoracic Cage
</div>
<figcaption>
The thoracic cage is formed by the (a) sternum and (b) 12 pairs of ribs
with their costal cartilages. The ribs are anchored posteriorly to the
12 thoracic vertebrae. The sternum consists of the manubrium, body, and
xiphoid process. The ribs are classified as true ribs (1–7) and false
ribs (8–12). The last two pairs of false ribs are also known as floating
ribs (11–12).
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2363542" data-alt="This figure shows
the skeletal structure of the rib cage. The left panel shows the
anterior view of the sternum and the right panel shows the anterior
panel of the sternum including the entire rib cage."> ![This figure
shows the skeletal structure of the rib cage. The left panel shows the
anterior view of the sternum and the right panel shows the anterior
panel of the sternum including the entire rib
cage.](../resources/721_Rib_Cage.jpg){: data-media-type="image/jpg"
width="550"} </span>
</figure>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2094432" markdown="1">
# Sternum
{: data-type="title"}

The sternum is the elongated bony structure that anchors the anterior
thoracic cage. It consists of three parts: the manubrium, body, and
xiphoid process. The <span data-type="term">manubrium</span> is the
wider, superior portion of the sternum. The top of the manubrium has a
shallow, U-shaped border called the <span data-type="term">jugular
(suprasternal) notch</span>. This can be easily felt at the anterior
base of the neck, between the medial ends of the clavicles. The <span
data-type="term">clavicular notch</span> is the shallow depression
located on either side at the superior-lateral margins of the manubrium.
This is the site of the sternoclavicular joint, between the sternum and
clavicle. The first ribs also attach to the manubrium.
{: #fs-id1989589}

The elongated, central portion of the sternum is the body. The manubrium
and body join together at the <span data-type="term">sternal
angle</span>, so called because the junction between these two
components is not flat, but forms a slight bend. The second rib attaches
to the sternum at the sternal angle. Since the first rib is hidden
behind the clavicle, the second rib is the highest rib that can be
identified by palpation. Thus, the sternal angle and second rib are
important landmarks for the identification and counting of the lower
ribs. Ribs 3–7 attach to the sternal body.
{: #fs-id1392096}

The inferior tip of the sternum is the <span data-type="term">xiphoid
process</span>. This small structure is cartilaginous early in life, but
gradually becomes ossified starting during middle age.
{: #fs-id2142315}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2310374" markdown="1">
# Ribs
{: data-type="title"}

Each rib is a curved, flattened bone that contributes to the wall of the
thorax. The ribs articulate posteriorly with the T1–T12 thoracic
vertebrae, and most attach anteriorly via their costal cartilages to the
sternum. There are 12 pairs of ribs. The ribs are numbered 1–12 in
accordance with the thoracic vertebrae.
{: #fs-id1910417}

<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1490113" markdown="1">
## Parts of a Typical Rib
{: data-type="title"}

The posterior end of a typical rib is called the <span
data-type="term">head of the rib</span> (see
[\[link\]](/m46352#fig-ch07_03_08){: .autogenerated-content}). This
region articulates primarily with the costal facet located on the body
of the same numbered thoracic vertebra and to a lesser degree, with the
costal facet located on the body of the next higher vertebra. Lateral to
the head is the narrowed <span data-type="term">neck of the rib</span>.
A small bump on the posterior rib surface is the <span
data-type="term">tubercle of the rib</span>, which articulates with the
facet located on the transverse process of the same numbered vertebra.
The remainder of the rib is the <span data-type="term">body of the
rib</span> (shaft). Just lateral to the tubercle is the <span
data-type="term">angle of the rib</span>, the point at which the rib has
its greatest degree of curvature. The angles of the ribs form the most
posterior extent of the thoracic cage. In the anatomical position, the
angles align with the medial border of the scapula. A shallow <span
data-type="term">costal groove</span> for the passage of blood vessels
and a nerve is found along the inferior margin of each rib.
{: #fs-id2251383}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id2339576" markdown="1">
## Rib Classifications
{: data-type="title"}

The bony ribs do not extend anteriorly completely around to the sternum.
Instead, each rib ends in a <span data-type="term">costal
cartilage</span>. These cartilages are made of hyaline cartilage and can
extend for several inches. Most ribs are then attached, either directly
or indirectly, to the sternum via their costal cartilage (see
[\[link\]](#fig-ch07_04_01){: .autogenerated-content}). The ribs are
classified into three groups based on their relationship to the sternum.
{: #fs-id2237365}

Ribs 1–7 are classified as <span data-type="term">true ribs</span>
(vertebrosternal ribs). The costal cartilage from each of these ribs
attaches directly to the sternum. Ribs 8–12 are called <span
data-type="term">false ribs</span> (vertebrochondral ribs). The costal
cartilages from these ribs do not attach directly to the sternum. For
ribs 8–10, the costal cartilages are attached to the cartilage of the
next higher rib. Thus, the cartilage of rib 10 attaches to the cartilage
of rib 9, rib 9 then attaches to rib 8, and rib 8 is attached to rib 7.
The last two false ribs (11–12) are also called <span
data-type="term">floating ribs</span> (vertebral ribs). These are short
ribs that do not attach to the sternum at all. Instead, their small
costal cartilages terminate within the musculature of the lateral
abdominal wall.
{: #fs-id1879764}

</section>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1893402" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

The thoracic cage protects the heart and lungs. It is composed of 12
pairs of ribs with their costal cartilages and the sternum. The ribs are
anchored posteriorly to the 12 thoracic vertebrae. The sternum consists
of the manubrium, body, and xiphoid process. The manubrium and body are
joined at the sternal angle, which is also the site for attachment of
the second ribs.
{: #fs-id2346794}

Ribs are flattened, curved bones and are numbered 1–12. Posteriorly, the
head of the rib articulates with the costal facets located on the bodies
of thoracic vertebrae and the rib tubercle articulates with the facet
located on the vertebral transverse process. The angle of the ribs forms
the most posterior portion of the thoracic cage. The costal groove in
the inferior margin of each rib carries blood vessels and a nerve.
Anteriorly, each rib ends in a costal cartilage. True ribs (1–7) attach
directly to the sternum via their costal cartilage. The false ribs
(8–12) either attach to the sternum indirectly or not at all. Ribs 8–10
have their costal cartilages attached to the cartilage of the next
higher rib. The floating ribs (11–12) are short and do not attach to the
sternum or to another rib.
{: #fs-id1701760}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1891863" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1855309">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1282535" markdown="1">
The sternum ________.
{: #fs-id1248496}

1.  consists of only two parts, the manubrium and xiphoid process
2.  has the sternal angle located between the manubrium and body
3.  receives direct attachments from the costal cartilages of all 12
    pairs of ribs
4.  articulates directly with the thoracic vertebrae
{: #fs-id2430450 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2336876" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id1342556}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2573730">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2278448" markdown="1">
The sternal angle is the ________.
{: #fs-id2058683}

1.  junction between the body and xiphoid process
2.  site for attachment of the clavicle
3.  site for attachment of the floating ribs
4.  junction between the manubrium and body
{: #fs-id1435344 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1884687" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id1283984}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2267142">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2158902" markdown="1">
The tubercle of a rib ________.
{: #fs-id2104148}

1.  is for articulation with the transverse process of a thoracic
    vertebra
2.  is for articulation with the body of a thoracic vertebra
3.  provides for passage of blood vessels and a nerve
4.  is the area of greatest rib curvature
{: #fs-id1279730 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1381015" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id1688531}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2005953">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1356104" markdown="1">
True ribs are ________.
{: #fs-id1898255}

1.  ribs 8–12
2.  attached via their costal cartilage to the next higher rib
3.  made entirely of bone, and thus do not have a costal cartilage
4.  attached via their costal cartilage directly to the sternum
{: #fs-id1708334 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1702911" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id1384590}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2227660" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1422627">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1947052" markdown="1">
Define the parts and functions of the thoracic cage.
{: #fs-id793696}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1976779" data-label="" markdown="1">
The thoracic cage is formed by the 12 pairs of ribs with their costal
cartilages and the sternum. The ribs are attached posteriorly to the 12
thoracic vertebrae and most are anchored anteriorly either directly or
indirectly to the sternum. The thoracic cage functions to protect the
heart and lungs.
{: #fs-id1400559}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2024686">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2241332" markdown="1">
Describe the parts of the sternum.
{: #fs-id1521188}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2097029" data-label="" markdown="1">
The sternum consists of the manubrium, body, and xiphoid process. The
manubrium forms the expanded, superior end of the sternum. It has a
jugular (suprasternal) notch, a pair of clavicular notches for
articulation with the clavicles, and receives the costal cartilage of
the first rib. The manubrium is joined to the body of the sternum at the
sternal angle, which is also the site for attachment of the second rib
costal cartilages. The body receives the costal cartilage attachments
for ribs 3–7. The small xiphoid process forms the inferior tip of the
sternum.
{: #fs-id1409532}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1700964">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1274800" markdown="1">
Discuss the parts of a typical rib.
{: #fs-id1274802}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1432864" data-label="" markdown="1">
A typical rib is a flattened, curved bone. The head of a rib is attached
posteriorly to the costal facets of the thoracic vertebrae. The rib
tubercle articulates with the transverse process of a thoracic vertebra.
The angle is the area of greatest rib curvature and forms the largest
portion of the thoracic cage. The body (shaft) of a rib extends
anteriorly and terminates at the attachment to its costal cartilage. The
shallow costal groove runs along the inferior margin of a rib and
carries blood vessels and a nerve.
{: #fs-id1894288}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1389511">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1279378" markdown="1">
Define the classes of ribs.
{: #fs-id1689036}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1397476" data-label="" markdown="1">
Ribs are classified based on if and how their costal cartilages attach
to the sternum. True (vertebrosternal) ribs are ribs 1–7. The costal
cartilage for each of these attaches directly to the sternum. False
(vertebrochondral) ribs, 8–12, are attached either indirectly or not at
all to the sternum. Ribs 8–10 are attached indirectly to the sternum.
For these ribs, the costal cartilage of each attaches to the cartilage
of the next higher rib. The last false ribs (11–12) are also called
floating (vertebral) ribs, because these ribs do not attach to the
sternum at all. Instead, the ribs and their small costal cartilages
terminate within the muscles of the lateral abdominal wall.
{: #fs-id2350301}

</div>
</div>
</section>



