---
title: Classification of Joints
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Distinguish between the functional and structural classifications for
  joints
* Describe the three functional types of joints and give an example of
  each
* List the three types of diarthrodial joints

</div>
A <span data-type="term">joint</span>, also called an <span
data-type="term">articulation</span>, is any place where adjacent bones
or bone and cartilage come together (articulate with each other) to form
a connection. Joints are classified both structurally and functionally.
Structural classifications of joints take into account whether the
adjacent bones are strongly anchored to each other by fibrous connective
tissue or cartilage, or whether the adjacent bones articulate with each
other within a fluid-filled space called a <span data-type="term">joint
cavity</span>. Functional classifications describe the degree of
movement available between the bones, ranging from immobile, to slightly
mobile, to freely moveable joints. The amount of movement available at a
particular joint of the body is related to the functional requirements
for that joint. Thus immobile or slightly moveable joints serve to
protect internal organs, give stability to the body, and allow for
limited body movement. In contrast, freely moveable joints allow for
much more extensive movements of the body and limbs.
{: #fs-id2252910}

<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1891862" markdown="1">
# Structural Classification of Joints
{: data-type="title"}

The structural classification of joints is based on whether the
articulating surfaces of the adjacent bones are directly connected by
fibrous connective tissue or cartilage, or whether the articulating
surfaces contact each other within a fluid-filled joint cavity. These
differences serve to divide the joints of the body into three structural
classifications. A <span data-type="term">fibrous joint</span> is where
the adjacent bones are united by fibrous connective tissue. At a <span
data-type="term">cartilaginous joint</span>, the bones are joined by
hyaline cartilage or fibrocartilage. At a <span
data-type="term">synovial joint</span>, the articulating surfaces of the
bones are not directly connected, but instead come into contact with
each other within a joint cavity that is filled with a lubricating
fluid. Synovial joints allow for free movement between the bones and are
the most common joints of the body.
{: #fs-id2266063}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2349325" markdown="1">
# Functional Classification of Joints
{: data-type="title"}

The functional classification of joints is determined by the amount of
mobility found between the adjacent bones. Joints are thus functionally
classified as a synarthrosis or immobile joint, an amphiarthrosis or
slightly moveable joint, or as a diarthrosis, which is a freely moveable
joint (arthroun = “to fasten by a joint”). Depending on their location,
fibrous joints may be functionally classified as a synarthrosis
(immobile joint) or an amphiarthrosis (slightly mobile joint).
Cartilaginous joints are also functionally classified as either a
synarthrosis or an amphiarthrosis joint. All synovial joints are
functionally classified as a diarthrosis joint.
{: #fs-id2080563}

<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1720982" markdown="1">
## Synarthrosis
{: data-type="title"}

An immobile or nearly immobile joint is called a <span
data-type="term">synarthrosis</span>. The immobile nature of these
joints provide for a strong union between the articulating bones. This
is important at locations where the bones provide protection for
internal organs. Examples include sutures, the fibrous joints between
the bones of the skull that surround and protect the brain
([\[link\]](#fig-ch09_01_01){: .autogenerated-content}), and the
manubriosternal joint, the cartilaginous joint that unites the manubrium
and body of the sternum for protection of the heart.
{: #fs-id2044686}

<figure id="fig-ch09_01_01">
<div data-type="title">
Suture Joints of Skull
</div>
<figcaption>
The suture joints of the skull are an example of a synarthrosis, an
immobile or essentially immobile joint.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1907417" data-alt="This image shows the
lateral view of the human skeleton. The lambdoid, coronal, and squamous
sutures are labeled."> ![This image shows the lateral view of the human
skeleton. The lambdoid, coronal, and squamous sutures are
labeled.](../resources/901_Skull_Sutures.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="340"} </span>
</figure>
</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1645740" markdown="1">
## Amphiarthrosis
{: data-type="title"}

An <span data-type="term">amphiarthrosis</span> is a joint that has
limited mobility. An example of this type of joint is the cartilaginous
joint that unites the bodies of adjacent vertebrae. Filling the gap
between the vertebrae is a thick pad of fibrocartilage called an
intervertebral disc ([\[link\]](#fig-ch09_01_02){:
.autogenerated-content}). Each intervertebral disc strongly unites the
vertebrae but still allows for a limited amount of movement between
them. However, the small movements available between adjacent vertebrae
can sum together along the length of the vertebral column to provide for
large ranges of body movements.
{: #fs-id1971993}

Another example of an amphiarthrosis is the pubic symphysis of the
pelvis. This is a cartilaginous joint in which the pubic regions of the
right and left hip bones are strongly anchored to each other by
fibrocartilage. This joint normally has very little mobility. The
strength of the pubic symphysis is important in conferring
weight-bearing stability to the pelvis.
{: #fs-id1481249}

<figure id="fig-ch09_01_02">
<div data-type="title">
Intervertebral Disc
</div>
<figcaption>
An intervertebral disc unites the bodies of adjacent vertebrae within
the vertebral column. Each disc allows for limited movement between the
vertebrae and thus functionally forms an amphiarthrosis type of joint.
Intervertebral discs are made of fibrocartilage and thereby structurally
form a symphysis type of cartilaginous joint.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2236830" data-alt="This image shows the
lateral view of the intervertebral disc located between two vertebral
discs."> ![This image shows the lateral view of the intervertebral disc
located between two vertebral
discs.](../resources/902_Intervertebral_Disk-02.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="330"} </span>
</figure>
</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id2131787" markdown="1">
## Diarthrosis
{: data-type="title"}

A freely mobile joint is classified as a <span
data-type="term">diarthrosis</span>. These types of joints include all
synovial joints of the body, which provide the majority of body
movements. Most diarthrotic joints are found in the appendicular
skeleton and thus give the limbs a wide range of motion. These joints
are divided into three categories, based on the number of axes of motion
provided by each. An axis in anatomy is described as the movements in
reference to the three anatomical planes: transverse, frontal, and
sagittal. Thus, diarthroses are classified as uniaxial (for movement in
one plane), biaxial (for movement in two planes), or multiaxial joints
(for movement in all three anatomical planes).
{: #fs-id2291906}

A <span data-type="term">uniaxial joint</span> only allows for a motion
in a single plane (around a single axis). The elbow joint, which only
allows for bending or straightening, is an example of a uniaxial joint.
A <span data-type="term">biaxial joint</span> allows for motions within
two planes. An example of a biaxial joint is a metacarpophalangeal joint
(knuckle joint) of the hand. The joint allows for movement along one
axis to produce bending or straightening of the finger, and movement
along a second axis, which allows for spreading of the fingers away from
each other and bringing them together. A joint that allows for the
several directions of movement is called a <span
data-type="term">multiaxial joint</span> (polyaxial or triaxial joint).
This type of diarthrotic joint allows for movement along three axes
([\[link\]](#fig-ch09_01_03){: .autogenerated-content}). The shoulder
and hip joints are multiaxial joints. They allow the upper or lower limb
to move in an anterior-posterior direction and a medial-lateral
direction. In addition, the limb can also be rotated around its long
axis. This third movement results in rotation of the limb so that its
anterior surface is moved either toward or away from the midline of the
body.
{: #fs-id2155865}

<figure id="fig-ch09_01_03">
<div data-type="title">
Multiaxial Joint
</div>
<figcaption>
A multiaxial joint, such as the hip joint, allows for three types of
movement: anterior-posterior, medial-lateral, and rotational.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2203122" data-alt="This image shows a
multiaxial joint. The left panel shows the acetabulum of the hip bone
and the head of the femur. The right panel shows a simplified
ball-and-socket joint structure to illustrate the movement of the hip
joint."> ![This image shows a multiaxial joint. The left panel shows the
acetabulum of the hip bone and the head of the femur. The right panel
shows a simplified ball-and-socket joint structure to illustrate the
movement of the hip joint.](../resources/903_Multiaxial_Joint.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="450"} </span>
</figure>
</section>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2767194" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

Structural classifications of the body joints are based on how the bones
are held together and articulate with each other. At fibrous joints, the
adjacent bones are directly united to each other by fibrous connective
tissue. Similarly, at a cartilaginous joint, the adjacent bones are
united by cartilage. In contrast, at a synovial joint, the articulating
bone surfaces are not directly united to each other, but come together
within a fluid-filled joint cavity.
{: #fs-id2166265}

The functional classification of body joints is based on the degree of
movement found at each joint. A synarthrosis is a joint that is
essentially immobile. This type of joint provides for a strong
connection between the adjacent bones, which serves to protect internal
structures such as the brain or heart. Examples include the fibrous
joints of the skull sutures and the cartilaginous manubriosternal joint.
A joint that allows for limited movement is an amphiarthrosis. An
example is the pubic symphysis of the pelvis, the cartilaginous joint
that strongly unites the right and left hip bones of the pelvis. The
cartilaginous joints in which vertebrae are united by intervertebral
discs provide for small movements between the adjacent vertebrae and are
also an amphiarthrosis type of joint. Thus, based on their movement
ability, both fibrous and cartilaginous joints are functionally
classified as a synarthrosis or amphiarthrosis.
{: #fs-id2058706}

The most common type of joint is the diarthrosis, which is a freely
moveable joint. All synovial joints are functionally classified as
diarthroses. A uniaxial diarthrosis, such as the elbow, is a joint that
only allows for movement within a single anatomical plane. Joints that
allow for movements in two planes are biaxial joints, such as the
metacarpophalangeal joints of the fingers. A multiaxial joint, such as
the shoulder or hip joint, allows for three planes of motions.
{: #fs-id3038250}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1224975" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1476098">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1638708" markdown="1">
The joint between adjacent vertebrae that includes an invertebral disc
is classified as which type of joint?
{: #fs-id1952798}

1.  diarthrosis
2.  multiaxial
3.  amphiarthrosis
4.  synarthrosis
{: #fs-id1640590 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2526051" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id1643864}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2303902">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2578947" markdown="1">
Which of these joints is classified as a synarthrosis?
{: #fs-id2094773}

1.  the pubic symphysis
2.  the manubriosternal joint
3.  an invertebral disc
4.  the shoulder joint
{: #fs-id1378612 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1887905" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id2605924}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1927730">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1221582" markdown="1">
Which of these joints is classified as a biaxial diarthrosis?
{: #fs-id2308181}

1.  the metacarpophalangeal joint
2.  the hip joint
3.  the elbow joint
4.  the pubic symphysis
{: #fs-id2345765 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1894304" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id2079498}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2226764">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2394771" markdown="1">
Synovial joints ________.
{: #fs-id2031025}

1.  may be functionally classified as a synarthrosis
2.  are joints where the bones are connected to each other by hyaline
    cartilage
3.  may be functionally classified as a amphiarthrosis
4.  are joints where the bones articulate with each other within a
    fluid-filled joint cavity
{: #fs-id2322199 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2059386" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id2251368}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1367786" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1415962">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1433888" markdown="1">
Define how joints are classified based on function. Describe and give an
example for each functional type of joint.
{: #fs-id1335694}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1765034" data-label="" markdown="1">
Functional classification of joints is based on the degree of mobility
exhibited by the joint. A synarthrosis is an immobile or nearly immobile
joint. An example is the manubriosternal joint or the joints between the
skull bones surrounding the brain. An amphiarthrosis is a slightly
moveable joint, such as the pubic symphysis or an intervertebral
cartilaginous joint. A diarthrosis is a freely moveable joint. These are
subdivided into three categories. A uniaxial diarthrosis allows movement
within a single anatomical plane or axis of motion. The elbow joint is
an example. A biaxial diarthrosis, such as the metacarpophalangeal
joint, allows for movement along two planes or axes. The hip and
shoulder joints are examples of a multiaxial diarthrosis. These allow
movements along three planes or axes.
{: #fs-id2346796}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2662141">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1284557" markdown="1">
Explain the reasons for why joints differ in their degree of mobility.
{: #fs-id1407398}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1879885" data-label="" markdown="1">
The functional needs of joints vary and thus joints differ in their
degree of mobility. A synarthrosis, which is an immobile joint, serves
to strongly connect bones thus protecting internal organs such as the
heart or brain. A slightly moveable amphiarthrosis provides for small
movements, which in the vertebral column can add together to yield a
much larger overall movement. The freedom of movement provided by a
diarthrosis can allow for large movements, such as is seen with most
joints of the limbs.
{: #fs-id1357290}

</div>
</div>
</section>



