---
title: Divisions of the Skeletal System
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Discuss the functions of the skeletal system
* Distinguish between the axial skeleton and appendicular skeleton
* Define the axial skeleton and its components
* Define the appendicular skeleton and its components

</div>
The skeletal system includes all of the bones, cartilages, and ligaments
of the body that support and give shape to the body and body structures.
The <span data-type="term">skeleton</span> consists of the bones of the
body. For adults, there are 206 bones in the skeleton. Younger
individuals have higher numbers of bones because some bones fuse
together during childhood and adolescence to form an adult bone. The
primary functions of the skeleton are to provide a rigid, internal
structure that can support the weight of the body against the force of
gravity, and to provide a structure upon which muscles can act to
produce movements of the body. The lower portion of the skeleton is
specialized for stability during walking or running. In contrast, the
upper skeleton has greater mobility and ranges of motion, features that
allow you to lift and carry objects or turn your head and trunk.
{: #fs-id1902734}

In addition to providing for support and movements of the body, the
skeleton has protective and storage functions. It protects the internal
organs, including the brain, spinal cord, heart, lungs, and pelvic
organs. The bones of the skeleton serve as the primary storage site for
important minerals such as calcium and phosphate. The bone marrow found
within bones stores fat and houses the blood-cell producing tissue of
the body.
{: #fs-id2081511}

The skeleton is subdivided into two major divisions—the axial and
appendicular.
{: #fs-id1382642}

<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1633012" markdown="1">
# The Axial Skeleton
{: data-type="title"}

The skeleton is subdivided into two major divisions—the axial and
appendicular. The <span data-type="term">axial skeleton</span> forms the
vertical, central axis of the body and includes all bones of the head,
neck, chest, and back ([\[link\]](#fig-ch07_01_01){:
.autogenerated-content}). It serves to protect the brain, spinal cord,
heart, and lungs. It also serves as the attachment site for muscles that
move the head, neck, and back, and for muscles that act across the
shoulder and hip joints to move their corresponding limbs.
{: #fs-id2023511}

The axial skeleton of the adult consists of 80 bones, including the
<span data-type="term">skull</span>, the <span
data-type="term">vertebral column</span>, and the <span
data-type="term">thoracic cage</span>. The skull is formed by 22 bones.
Also associated with the head are an additional seven bones, including
the <span data-type="term">hyoid bone</span> and the <span
data-type="term">ear ossicles</span> (three small bones found in each
middle ear). The vertebral column consists of 24 bones, each called a
<span data-type="term">vertebra</span>, plus the <span
data-type="term">sacrum</span> and <span data-type="term">coccyx</span>.
The thoracic cage includes the 12 pairs of <span
data-type="term">ribs</span>, and the <span
data-type="term">sternum</span>, the flattened bone of the anterior
chest.
{: #fs-id2228791}

<figure id="fig-ch07_01_01">
<div data-type="title">
Axial and Appendicular Skeleton
</div>
<figcaption>
The axial skeleton supports the head, neck, back, and chest and thus
forms the vertical axis of the body. It consists of the skull, vertebral
column (including the sacrum and coccyx), and the thoracic cage, formed
by the ribs and sternum. The appendicular skeleton is made up of all
bones of the upper and lower limbs.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1351927" data-alt="This diagram shows
the human skeleton and identifies the major bones. The left panel shows
the anterior view (from the front) and the right panel shows the
posterior view (from the back)."> ![This diagram shows the human
skeleton and identifies the major bones. The left panel shows the
anterior view (from the front) and the right panel shows the posterior
view (from the back).](../resources/701_Axial_Skeleton-01.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="500"} </span>
</figure>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1707953" markdown="1">
# The Appendicular Skeleton
{: data-type="title"}

The <span data-type="term">appendicular skeleton</span> includes all
bones of the upper and lower limbs, plus the bones that attach each limb
to the axial skeleton. There are 126 bones in the appendicular skeleton
of an adult. The bones of the appendicular skeleton are covered in a
separate chapter.
{: #fs-id2265115}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1723981" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

The skeletal system includes all of the bones, cartilages, and ligaments
of the body. It serves to support the body, protect the brain and other
internal organs, and provides a rigid structure upon which muscles can
pull to generate body movements. It also stores fat and the tissue
responsible for the production of blood cells. The skeleton is
subdivided into two parts. The axial skeleton forms a vertical axis that
includes the head, neck, back, and chest. It has 80 bones and consists
of the skull, vertebral column, and thoracic cage. The adult vertebral
column consists of 24 vertebrae plus the sacrum and coccyx. The thoracic
cage is formed by 12 pairs of ribs and the sternum. The appendicular
skeleton consists of 126 bones in the adult and includes all of the
bones of the upper and lower limbs plus the bones that anchor each limb
to the axial skeleton.
{: #fs-id1219771}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1469886" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2637677">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1417344" markdown="1">
Which of the following is part of the axial skeleton?
{: #fs-id1959873}

1.  shoulder bones
2.  thigh bone
3.  foot bones
4.  vertebral column
{: #fs-id2305890 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2662236" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id2110214}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1927640">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2344108" markdown="1">
Which of the following is a function of the axial skeleton?
{: #fs-id1977310}

1.  allows for movement of the wrist and hand
2.  protects nerves and blood vessels at the elbow
3.  supports trunk of body
4.  allows for movements of the ankle and foot
{: #fs-id1649757 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2664252" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id1616610}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1888088">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2296124" markdown="1">
The axial skeleton ________.
{: #fs-id2061204}

1.  consists of 126 bones
2.  forms the vertical axis of the body
3.  includes all bones of the body trunk and limbs
4.  includes only the bones of the lower limbs
{: #fs-id1751726 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2166827" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id1858451}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1417952" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Question
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2329194">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2031998" markdown="1">
Define the two divisions of the skeleton.
{: #fs-id2266629}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2311187" data-label="" markdown="1">
The axial skeleton forms the vertical axis of the body and includes the
bones of the head, neck, back, and chest of the body. It consists of 80
bones that include the skull, vertebral column, and thoracic cage. The
appendicular skeleton consists of 126 bones and includes all bones of
the upper and lower limbs.
{: #fs-id2131884}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2276568">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2096113" markdown="1">
Discuss the functions of the axial skeleton.
{: #fs-id2256879}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2230632" data-label="" markdown="1">
The axial skeleton supports the head, neck, back, and chest of the body
and allows for movements of these body regions. It also gives bony
protections for the brain, spinal cord, heart, and lungs; stores fat and
minerals; and houses the blood-cell producing tissue.
{: #fs-id2071883}

</div>
</div>
</section>



