---
title: Introduction
layout: page
---

<?cnx.eoc
  class="summary" title="Chapter Review"?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="interactive-exercise" title="Interactive Link Questions"?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="multiple-choice" title="Review Questions" ?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="free-response" title="Critical Thinking Questions"?>

<figure id="fig-ch11_00_01" class="splash">
<div data-type="title">
A Body in Motion
</div>
<figcaption>
The muscular system allows us to move, flex and contort our bodies.
Practicing yoga, as pictured here, is a good example of the voluntary
use of the muscular system. (credit: Dmitry Yanchylenko)
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2471460" data-alt="This photo shows a
man executing a complicated yoga pose."> ![This photo shows a man
executing a complicated yoga
pose.](../resources/1100_Body_in_Motion.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="500"} </span>
</figure>
<div data-type="note" id="eip-773" class="chapter-objectives" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Chapter Objectives
</div>
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
{: #fs-id1169724099397}

* Describe the actions and roles of agonists and antagonists
* Explain the structure and organization of muscle fascicles and their
  role in generating force
* Explain the criteria used to name skeletal muscles
* Identify the skeletal muscles and their actions on the skeleton and
  soft tissues of the body
* Identify the origins and insertions of skeletal muscles and the prime
  movements
{: #eip-id8678041}

</div>
Think about the things that you do each day—talking, walking, sitting,
standing, and running—all of these activities require movement of
particular skeletal muscles. Skeletal muscles are even used during
sleep. The diaphragm is a sheet of skeletal muscle that has to contract
and relax for you to breathe day and night. If you recall from your
study of the skeletal system and joints, body movement occurs around the
joints in the body. The focus of this chapter is on skeletal muscle
organization. The system to name skeletal muscles will be explained; in
some cases, the muscle is named by its shape, and in other cases it is
named by its location or attachments to the skeleton. If you understand
the meaning of the name of the muscle, often it will help you remember
its location and/or what it does. This chapter also will describe how
skeletal muscles are arranged to accomplish movement, and how other
muscles may assist, or be arranged on the skeleton to resist or carry
out the opposite movement. The actions of the skeletal muscles will be
covered in a regional manner, working from the head down to the toes.
{: #fs-id2826019}




