---
title: Introduction
layout: page
---

<?cnx.eoc
  class="summary" title="Chapter Review"?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="interactive-exercise" title="Interactive Link Questions"?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="multiple-choice" title="Review Questions" ?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="free-response" title="Critical Thinking Questions"?>

<figure id="fig-ch27_00_01" class="splash">
<div data-type="title">
Venus Williams Perspiring on the Tennis Court
</div>
<figcaption>
The body has critically important mechanisms for balancing the intake
and output of bodily fluids. An athlete must continuously replace the
water and electrolytes lost in sweat. (credit: “Edwin
Martinez1”/Wikimedia Commons)
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2030710" data-alt="This is a photo of
Venus Williams, the famous tennis player, executing a hard tennis
swing."> ![This is a photo of Venus Williams, the famous tennis player,
executing a hard tennis
swing.](../resources/Venus_at_us_open_2009.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="400"} </span>
</figure>
<div data-type="note" id="fs-id1167709673078" class="chapter-objectives" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Chapter Objectives
</div>
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
{: #fs-id1167692575095}

* Identify the body’s main fluid compartments
* Define plasma osmolality and identify two ways in which plasma
  osmolality is maintained
* Identify the six ions most important to the function of the body
* Define buffer and discuss the role of buffers in the body
* Explain why bicarbonate must be conserved rather than reabsorbed in
  the kidney
* Identify the normal range of blood pH and name the conditions where
  one has a blood pH that is either too high or too low
{: #fs-id1167692808208}

</div>
Homeostasis, or the maintenance of constant conditions in the body, is a
fundamental property of all living things. In the human body, the
substances that participate in chemical reactions must remain within
narrows ranges of concentration. Too much or too little of a single
substance can disrupt your bodily functions. Because metabolism relies
on reactions that are all interconnected, any disruption might affect
multiple organs or even organ systems. Water is the most ubiquitous
substance in the chemical reactions of life. The interactions of various
aqueous solutions—solutions in which water is the solvent—are
continuously monitored and adjusted by a large suite of interconnected
feedback systems in your body. Understanding the ways in which the body
maintains these critical balances is key to understanding good health.
{: #fs-id2020559}




