---
title: Interactions of Skeletal Muscles, Their Fascicle Arrangement, and Their Lever Systems
layout: page
---
---

<div data-type="title">
Interactions of Skeletal Muscles, Their Fascicle Arrangement, and Their
Lever Systems
</div>
<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Compare and contrast agonist and antagonist muscles
* Describe how fascicles are arranged within a skeletal muscle
* Explain the major events of a skeletal muscle contraction within a
  muscle in generating force

</div>
To move the skeleton, the tension created by the contraction of the
fibers in most skeletal muscles is transferred to the tendons. The
tendons are strong bands of dense, regular connective tissue that
connect muscles to bones. The bone connection is why this muscle tissue
is called skeletal muscle.
{: #fs-id1592812}

<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1616706" markdown="1">
# Interactions of Skeletal Muscles in the Body
{: data-type="title"}

To pull on a bone, that is, to change the angle at its synovial joint,
which essentially moves the skeleton, a skeletal muscle must also be
attached to a fixed part of the skeleton. The moveable end of the muscle
that attaches to the bone being pulled is called the muscle’s <span
data-type="term">insertion</span>, and the end of the muscle attached to
a fixed (stabilized) bone is called the <span
data-type="term">origin</span>. During forearm <span
data-type="term">flexion</span>—bending the elbow—the brachioradialis
assists the brachialis.
{: #fs-id2874718}

Although a number of muscles may be involved in an action, the principal
muscle involved is called the <span data-type="term">prime mover</span>,
or <span data-type="term">agonist</span>. To lift a cup, a muscle called
the biceps brachii is actually the prime mover; however, because it can
be assisted by the brachialis, the brachialis is called a <span
data-type="term">synergist</span> in this action
([\[link\]](#fig-ch11_01_01){: .autogenerated-content}). A synergist can
also be a <span data-type="term">fixator</span> that stabilizes the bone
that is the attachment for the prime mover’s origin.
{: #fs-id2684650}

<figure id="fig-ch11_01_01">
<div data-type="title">
Prime Movers and Synergists
</div>
<figcaption>
The biceps brachii flex the lower arm. The brachoradialis, in the
forearm, and brachialis, located deep to the biceps in the upper arm,
are both synergists that aid in this motion.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2270377" data-alt="This diagram shows
two separate hands holding a glass of liquid. The biceps muscles are
highlighted in pink."> ![This diagram shows two separate hands holding a
glass of liquid. The biceps muscles are highlighted in
pink.](../resources/1101_Biceps_Muscle.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="420"} </span>
</figure>
A muscle with the opposite action of the prime mover is called an <span
data-type="term">antagonist</span>. Antagonists play two important roles
in muscle function: (1) they maintain body or limb position, such as
holding the arm out or standing erect; and (2) they control rapid
movement, as in shadow boxing without landing a punch or the ability to
check the motion of a limb.
{: #fs-id2260527}

For example, to extend the knee, a group of four muscles called the
quadriceps femoris in the anterior compartment of the thigh are
activated (and would be called the agonists of knee extension). However,
to flex the knee joint, an opposite or antagonistic set of muscles
called the hamstrings is activated.
{: #fs-id2523908}

As you can see, these terms would also be reversed for the opposing
action. If you consider the first action as the knee bending, the
hamstrings would be called the agonists and the quadriceps femoris would
then be called the antagonists. See [\[link\]](#tbl-ch11_01){:
.autogenerated-content} for a list of some agonists and antagonists.
{: #fs-id2473819}

<table id="tbl-ch11_01" summary=""><thead> <tr> <th colspan="3">Agonist and Antagonist Skeletal Muscle Pairs</th> </tr> <tr> <th>Agonist</th> <th>Antagonist</th> <th>Movement</th> </tr> </thead><tbody> <tr> <td>Biceps brachii: in the anterior compartment of the arm</td> <td>Triceps brachii: in the posterior compartment of the arm</td> <td>The biceps brachii flexes the forearm, whereas the triceps brachii extends it.</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Hamstrings: group of three muscles in the posterior compartment of the thigh</td> <td>Quadriceps femoris: group of four muscles in the anterior compartment of the thigh</td> <td>The hamstrings flex the leg, whereas the quadriceps femoris extend it.</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Flexor digitorum superficialis and flexor digitorum profundus: in the anterior compartment of the forearm</td> <td>Extensor digitorum: in the posterior compartment of the forearm</td> <td>The flexor digitorum superficialis and flexor digitorum profundus flex the fingers and the hand at the wrist, whereas the extensor digitorum extends the fingers and the hand at the wrist.</td> </tr> </tbody></table>
There are also skeletal muscles that do not pull against the skeleton
for movements. For example, there are the muscles that produce facial
expressions. The insertions and origins of facial muscles are in the
skin, so that certain individual muscles contract to form a smile or
frown, form sounds or words, and raise the eyebrows. There also are
skeletal muscles in the tongue, and the external urinary and anal
sphincters that allow for voluntary regulation of urination and
defecation, respectively. In addition, the diaphragm contracts and
relaxes to change the volume of the pleural cavities but it does not
move the skeleton to do this.
{: #fs-id2640365}

<div data-type="note" id="fs-id2300032" class="anatomy everyday" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Everyday Connections
</div>
<span data-type="title">Exercise and Stretching</span> When exercising,
it is important to first warm up the muscles. Stretching pulls on the
muscle fibers and it also results in an increased blood flow to the
muscles being worked. Without a proper warm-up, it is possible that you
may either damage some of the muscle fibers or pull a tendon. A pulled
tendon, regardless of location, results in pain, swelling, and
diminished function; if it is moderate to severe, the injury could
immobilize you for an extended period.
{: #fs-id2725106}

Recall the discussion about muscles crossing joints to create movement.
Most of the joints you use during exercise are synovial joints, which
have synovial fluid in the joint space between two bones. Exercise and
stretching may also have a beneficial effect on synovial joints.
Synovial fluid is a thin, but viscous film with the consistency of egg
whites. When you first get up and start moving, your joints feel stiff
for a number of reasons. After proper stretching and warm-up, the
synovial fluid may become less viscous, allowing for better joint
function.
{: #fs-id1525193}

</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2644935" markdown="1">
# Patterns of Fascicle Organization
{: data-type="title"}

Skeletal muscle is enclosed in connective tissue scaffolding at three
levels. Each muscle fiber (cell) is covered by endomysium and the entire
muscle is covered by epimysium. When a group of muscle fibers is
“bundled” as a unit within the whole muscle by an additional covering of
a connective tissue called perimysium, that bundled group of muscle
fibers is called a <span data-type="term">fascicle</span>. Fascicle
arrangement by perimysia is correlated to the force generated by a
muscle; it also affects the range of motion of the muscle. Based on the
patterns of fascicle arrangement, skeletal muscles can be classified in
several ways. What follows are the most common fascicle arrangements.
{: #fs-id2003817}

<span data-type="term">Parallel</span> muscles have fascicles that are
arranged in the same direction as the long axis of the muscle
([\[link\]](#fig-ch11_01_02){: .autogenerated-content}). The majority of
skeletal muscles in the body have this type of organization. Some
parallel muscles are flat sheets that expand at the ends to make broad
attachments. Other parallel muscles are rotund with tendons at one or
both ends. Muscles that seem to be plump have a large mass of tissue
located in the middle of the muscle, between the insertion and the
origin, which is known as the central body. A more common name for this
muscle is <span data-type="term">belly</span>. When a muscle contracts,
the contractile fibers shorten it to an even larger bulge. For example,
extend and then flex your biceps brachii muscle; the large, middle
section is the belly ([\[link\]](#fig-ch11_01_03){:
.autogenerated-content}). When a parallel muscle has a central, large
belly that is spindle-shaped, meaning it tapers as it extends to its
origin and insertion, it sometimes is called <span
data-type="term">fusiform</span>.
{: #fs-id2292670}

<figure id="fig-ch11_01_02">
<div data-type="title">
Muscle Shapes and Fiber Alignment
</div>
<figcaption>
The skeletal muscles of the body typically come in seven different
general shapes.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1618628" data-alt="This figure shows
the human body with the major muscle groups labeled."> ![This figure
shows the human body with the major muscle groups
labeled.](../resources/1102_Fascicle_Muscle_Shapes.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="495"} </span>
</figure>
<figure id="fig-ch11_01_03">
<div data-type="title">
Biceps Brachii Muscle Contraction
</div>
<figcaption>
The large mass at the center of a muscle is called the belly. Tendons
emerge from both ends of the belly and connect the muscle to the bones,
allowing the skeleton to move. The tendons of the bicep connect to the
upper arm and the forearm. (credit: Victoria Garcia)
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2644032" data-alt="This photo shows a
person flexing her biceps."> ![This photo shows a person flexing her
biceps.](../resources/1103_Biceps_Brachii_Muscle_Contraction.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="380"} </span>
</figure>
<span data-type="term">Circular</span> muscles are also called
sphincters (see [\[link\]](#fig-ch11_01_02){: .autogenerated-content}).
When they relax, the sphincters’ concentrically arranged bundles of
muscle fibers increase the size of the opening, and when they contract,
the size of the opening shrinks to the point of closure. The orbicularis
oris muscle is a circular muscle that goes around the mouth. When it
contracts, the oral opening becomes smaller, as when puckering the lips
for whistling. Another example is the orbicularis oculi, one of which
surrounds each eye. Consider, for example, the names of the two
orbicularis muscles (orbicularis oris and oribicularis oculi), where
part of the first name of both muscles is the same. The first part of
orbicularis, orb (orb = “circular”), is a reference to a round or
circular structure; it may also make one think of orbit, such as the
moon’s path around the earth. The word oris (oris = “oral”) refers to
the oral cavity, or the mouth. The word oculi (ocular = “eye”) refers to
the eye.
{: #fs-id1905280}

There are other muscles throughout the body named by their shape or
location. The deltoid is a large, triangular-shaped muscle that covers
the shoulder. It is so-named because the Greek letter delta looks like a
triangle. The rectus abdomis (rector = “straight”) is the straight
muscle in the anterior wall of the abdomen, while the rectus femoris is
the straight muscle in the anterior compartment of the thigh.
{: #fs-id2166217}

When a muscle has a widespread expansion over a sizable area, but then
the fascicles come to a single, common attachment point, the muscle is
called <span data-type="term">convergent</span>. The attachment point
for a convergent muscle could be a tendon, an aponeurosis (a flat, broad
tendon), or a raphe (a very slender tendon). The large muscle on the
chest, the pectoralis major, is an example of a convergent muscle
because it converges on the greater tubercle of the humerus via a
tendon. The temporalis muscle of the cranium is another.
{: #fs-id1290061}

<span data-type="term">Pennate</span> muscles (penna = “feathers”) blend
into a tendon that runs through the central region of the muscle for its
whole length, somewhat like the quill of a feather with the muscle
arranged similar to the feathers. Due to this design, the muscle fibers
in a pennate muscle can only pull at an angle, and as a result,
contracting pennate muscles do not move their tendons very far. However,
because a pennate muscle generally can hold more muscle fibers within
it, it can produce relatively more tension for its size. There are three
subtypes of pennate muscles.
{: #fs-id1278917}

In a <span data-type="term">unipennate</span> muscle, the fascicles are
located on one side of the tendon. The extensor digitorum of the forearm
is an example of a unipennate muscle. A <span
data-type="term">bipennate</span> muscle has fascicles on both sides of
the tendon. In some pennate muscles, the muscle fibers wrap around the
tendon, sometimes forming individual fascicles in the process. This
arrangement is referred to as <span
data-type="term">multipennate</span>. A common example is the deltoid
muscle of the shoulder, which covers the shoulder but has a single
tendon that inserts on the deltoid tuberosity of the humerus.
{: #fs-id2434368}

Because of fascicles, a portion of a multipennate muscle like the
deltoid can be stimulated by the nervous system to change the direction
of the pull. For example, when the deltoid muscle contracts, the arm
abducts (moves away from midline in the sagittal plane), but when only
the anterior fascicle is stimulated, the arm will <span
data-type="term">abduct</span> and flex (move anteriorly at the shoulder
joint).
{: #fs-id2360657}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2240858" markdown="1">
# The Lever System of Muscle and Bone Interactions
{: data-type="title"}

Skeletal muscles do not work by themselves. Muscles are arranged in
pairs based on their functions. For muscles attached to the bones of the
skeleton, the connection determines the force, speed, and range of
movement. These characteristics depend on each other and can explain the
general organization of the muscular and skeletal systems.
{: #fs-id2230136}

The skeleton and muscles act together to move the body. Have you ever
used the back of a hammer to remove a nail from wood? The handle acts as
a lever and the head of the hammer acts as a fulcrum, the fixed point
that the force is applied to when you pull back or push down on the
handle. The effort applied to this system is the pulling or pushing on
the handle to remove the nail, which is the load, or “resistance” to the
movement of the handle in the system. Our musculoskeletal system works
in a similar manner, with bones being stiff levers and the articular
endings of the bones—encased in synovial joints—acting as fulcrums. The
load would be an object being lifted or any resistance to a movement
(your head is a load when you are lifting it), and the effort, or
applied force, comes from contracting skeletal muscle.
{: #fs-id1702969}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1618468" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

Skeletal muscles each have an origin and an insertion. The end of the
muscle that attaches to the bone being pulled is called the muscle’s
insertion and the end of the muscle attached to a fixed, or stabilized,
bone is called the origin. The muscle primarily responsible for a
movement is called the prime mover, and muscles that assist in this
action are called synergists. A synergist that makes the insertion site
more stable is called a fixator. Meanwhile, a muscle with the opposite
action of the prime mover is called an antagonist. Several factors
contribute to the force generated by a skeletal muscle. One is the
arrangement of the fascicles in the skeletal muscle. Fascicles can be
parallel, circular, convergent, pennate, fusiform, or triangular. Each
arrangement has its own range of motion and ability to do work.
{: #fs-id1949887}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2101141" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2595266">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2395228" markdown="1">
Which of the following is unique to the muscles of facial expression?
{: #fs-id2575709}

1.  They all originate from the scalp musculature.
2.  They insert onto the cartilage found around the face.
3.  They only insert onto the facial bones.
4.  They insert into the skin.
{: #fs-id1534633 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2488022" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id2463372}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2761928">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2570755" markdown="1">
Which of the following helps an agonist work?
{: #fs-id2797282}

1.  a synergist
2.  a fixator
3.  an insertion
4.  an antagonist
{: #fs-id2306342 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2450234" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id2316221}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2874612">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2872353" markdown="1">
Which of the following statements is correct about what happens during
flexion?
{: #fs-id1514214}

1.  The angle between bones is increased.
2.  The angle between bones is decreased.
3.  The bone moves away from the body.
4.  The bone moves toward the center of the body.
{: #fs-id2612667 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2524391" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id2295022}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2109061">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2568980" markdown="1">
Which is moved the <em data-effect="italics">least </em>during muscle
contraction?
{: #fs-id2293611}

1.  the origin
2.  the insertion
3.  the ligaments
4.  the joints
{: #fs-id2759238 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1587136" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id2844496}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2361712">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2517479" markdown="1">
Which muscle has a convergent pattern of fascicles?
{: #fs-id1364961}

1.  biceps brachii
2.  gluteus maximus
3.  pectoralis major
4.  rectus femoris
{: #fs-id2072110 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2383639" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id2570487}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2790910">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2489041" markdown="1">
A muscle that has a pattern of fascicles running along the long axis of
the muscle has which of the following fascicle arrangements?
{: #fs-id1920938}

1.  circular
2.  pennate
3.  parallel
4.  rectus
{: #fs-id1616434 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2308335" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id2395806}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id3088365">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2006607" markdown="1">
Which arrangement<em data-effect="italics"> best</em> describes a
bipennate muscle?
{: #fs-id4426021}

1.  The muscle fibers feed in on an angle to a long tendon from both
    sides.
2.  The muscle fibers feed in on an angle to a long tendon from all
    directions.
3.  The muscle fibers feed in on an angle to a long tendon from one
    side.
4.  The muscle fibers on one side of a tendon feed into it at a certain
    angle and muscle fibers on the other side of the tendon feed into it
    at the opposite angle.
{: #fs-id2068755 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1320977" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id3302261}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2115603" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1999493">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1910307" markdown="1">
What effect does fascicle arrangement have on a muscle’s action?
{: #fs-id1546930}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2444227" data-label="" markdown="1">
Fascicle arrangements determine what type of movement a muscle can make.
For instance, circular muscles act as sphincters, closing orifices.
{: #fs-id2594555}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2567607">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2472929" markdown="1">
Movements of the body occur at joints. Describe how muscles are arranged
around the joints of the body.
{: #fs-id4256886}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1481914" data-label="" markdown="1">
Muscles work in pairs to facilitate movement of the bones around the
joints. Agonists are the prime movers while antagonists oppose or resist
the movements of the agonists. Synergists assist the agonists, and
fixators stabilize a muscle’s origin.
{: #fs-id1516671}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2661166">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2128050" markdown="1">
Explain how a synergist assists an agonist by being a fixator.
{: #fs-id2489818}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2168014" data-label="" markdown="1">
Agonists are the prime movers while antagonists oppose or resist the
movements of the agonists. Synergists assist the agonists, and fixators
stabilize a muscle’s origin.
{: #fs-id2875140}

</div>
</div>
</section>



