---
title: Nutrition and Diet
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Explain how different foods can affect metabolism
* Describe a healthy diet, as recommended by the U.S. Department of
  Agriculture (USDA)
* List reasons why vitamins and minerals are critical to a healthy diet

</div>
The carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins in the foods you eat are used
for energy to power molecular, cellular, and organ system activities.
Importantly, the energy is stored primarily as fats. The quantity and
quality of food that is ingested, digested, and absorbed affects the
amount of fat that is stored as excess calories. Diet—both what you eat
and how much you eat—has a dramatic impact on your health. Eating too
much or too little food can lead to serious medical issues, including
cardiovascular disease, cancer, anorexia, and diabetes, among others.
Combine an unhealthy diet with unhealthy environmental conditions, such
as smoking, and the potential medical complications increase
significantly.
{: #fs-id3072789}

<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2454328" markdown="1">
# Food and Metabolism
{: data-type="title"}

The amount of energy that is needed or ingested per day is measured in
calories. A <span data-type="term">calorie</span> is the amount of heat
it takes to raise 1 g of water by 1 °C. On average, a person needs 1500
to 2000 calories per day to sustain (or carry out) daily activities. The
total number of calories needed by one person is dependent on their body
mass, age, height, gender, activity level, and the amount of exercise
per day. If exercise is regular part of one’s day, more calories are
required. As a rule, people underestimate the number of calories
ingested and overestimate the amount they burn through exercise. This
can lead to ingestion of too many calories per day. The accumulation of
an extra 3500 calories adds one pound of weight. If an excess of 200
calories per day is ingested, one extra pound of body weight will be
gained every 18 days. At that rate, an extra 20 pounds can be gained
over the course of a year. Of course, this increase in calories could be
offset by increased exercise. Running or jogging one mile burns almost
100 calories.
{: #fs-id2322614}

The type of food ingested also affects the body’s metabolic rate.
Processing of carbohydrates requires less energy than processing of
proteins. In fact, the breakdown of carbohydrates requires the least
amount of energy, whereas the processing of proteins demands the most
energy. In general, the amount of calories ingested and the amount of
calories burned determines the overall weight. To lose weight, the
number of calories burned per day must exceed the number ingested.
Calories are in almost everything you ingest, so when considering
calorie intake, beverages must also be considered.
{: #fs-id1479318}

To help provide guidelines regarding the types and quantities of food
that should be eaten every day, the USDA has updated their food
guidelines from MyPyramid to MyPlate. They have put the recommended
elements of a healthy meal into the context of a place setting of food.
MyPlate categorizes food into the standard six food groups: fruits,
vegetables, grains, protein foods, dairy, and oils. The accompanying
website gives clear recommendations regarding quantity and type of each
food that you should consume each day, as well as identifying which
foods belong in each category. The accompanying graphic
([\[link\]](#fig-ch25_07_01){: .autogenerated-content}) gives a clear
visual with general recommendations for a healthy and balanced meal. The
guidelines recommend to “Make half your plate fruits and vegetables.”
The other half is grains and protein, with a slightly higher quantity of
grains than protein. Dairy products are represented by a drink, but the
quantity can be applied to other dairy products as well.
{: #fs-id4068594}

<figure id="fig-ch25_07_01">
<div data-type="title">
MyPlate
</div>
<figcaption>
The U.S. Department of Agriculture developed food guidelines called
MyPlate to help demonstrate how to maintain a healthy lifestyle.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2797232" data-alt="The figure shows a
plate with different food groups assigned different portion sizes.">
![The figure shows a plate with different food groups assigned different
portion sizes.](../resources/2524_MyPlate.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="350"} </span>
</figure>
ChooseMyPlate.gov provides extensive online resources for planning a
healthy diet and lifestyle, including offering weight management tips
and recommendations for physical activity. It also includes the
SuperTracker, a web-based application to help you analyze your own diet
and physical activity.
{: #fs-id1443825}

<div data-type="note" id="fs-id2490782" class="anatomy everyday" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Everyday Connections
</div>
<span data-type="title">Metabolism and Obesity</span> Obesity in the
United States is epidemic. The rate of obesity has been steadily rising
since the 1980s. In the 1990s, most states reported that less than 10
percent of their populations was obese, and the state with the highest
rate reported that only 15 percent of their population was considered
obese. By 2010, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
reported that nearly 36 percent of adults over 20 years old were obese
and an additional 33 percent were overweight, leaving only about 30
percent of the population at a healthy weight. These studies find the
highest levels of obesity are concentrated in the southern states. They
also find the level of childhood obesity is rising.
{: #fs-id1741734}

Obesity is defined by the <span data-type="term">body mass index
(BMI)</span>, which is a measure of an individual’s weight-to-height
ratio. The normal, or healthy, BMI range is between 18 and 24.9
kg/m<sup>2</sup>. Overweight is defined as a BMI of 25 to 29.9
kg/m<sup>2</sup>, and obesity is considered to be a BMI greater than 30
kg/m<sup>2</sup>. Obesity can arise from a number of factors, including
overeating, poor diet, sedentary lifestyle, limited sleep, genetic
factors, and even diseases or drugs. Severe obesity (morbid obesity) or
long-term obesity can result in serious medical conditions, including
coronary heart disease; type 2 diabetes; endometrial, breast, or colon
cancer; hypertension (high blood pressure); dyslipidemia (high
cholesterol or elevated triglycerides); stroke; liver disease; gall
bladder disease; sleep apnea or respiratory diseases; osteoarthritis;
and infertility. Research has shown that losing weight can help reduce
or reverse the complications associated with these conditions.
{: #fs-id2150873}

</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1902602" markdown="1">
# Vitamins
{: data-type="title"}

<span data-type="term">Vitamins</span> are organic compounds found in
foods and are a necessary part of the biochemical reactions in the body.
They are involved in a number of processes, including mineral and bone
metabolism, and cell and tissue growth, and they act as cofactors for
energy metabolism. The B vitamins play the largest role of any vitamins
in metabolism ([\[link\]](#tbl-ch25_03){: .autogenerated-content} and
[\[link\]](#tbl-ch25_04){: .autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id3089953}

You get most of your vitamins through your diet, although some can be
formed from the precursors absorbed during digestion. For example, the
body synthesizes vitamin A from the β-carotene in orange vegetables like
carrots and sweet potatoes. Vitamins are either fat-soluble or
water-soluble. Fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K, are absorbed through
the intestinal tract with lipids in chylomicrons. Vitamin D is also
synthesized in the skin through exposure to sunlight. Because they are
carried in lipids, fat-soluble vitamins can accumulate in the lipids
stored in the body. If excess vitamins are retained in the lipid stores
in the body, hypervitaminosis can result.
{: #fs-id1612761}

Water-soluble vitamins, including the eight B vitamins and vitamin C,
are absorbed with water in the gastrointestinal tract. These vitamins
move easily through bodily fluids, which are water based, so they are
not stored in the body. Excess water-soluble vitamins are excreted in
the urine. Therefore, hypervitaminosis of water-soluble vitamins rarely
occurs, except with an excess of vitamin supplements.
{: #fs-id1813672}

<table id="tbl-ch25_03" summary=""><thead> <tr> <th colspan="5">Fat-soluble Vitamins</th> </tr> <tr> <th>Vitamin and alternative name</th> <th>Sources</th> <th>Recommended daily allowance</th> <th>Function</th> <th>Problems associated with deficiency</th> </tr> </thead><tbody> <tr> <td>A <div data-type="newline" data-count="1"><br /></div>retinal or β-carotene</td> <td>Yellow and orange fruits and vegetables, dark green leafy vegetables, eggs, milk, liver</td> <td>700–900 <em data-effect="italics">µ</em>g</td> <td>Eye and bone development, immune function</td> <td>Night blindness, epithelial changes, immune system deficiency</td> </tr> <tr> <td>D <div data-type="newline" data-count="1"><br /></div>cholecalciferol</td> <td>Dairy products, egg yolks; also synthesized in the skin from exposure to sunlight</td> <td>5–15 <em data-effect="italics">µ</em>g</td> <td>Aids in calcium absorption, promoting bone growth</td> <td>Rickets, bone pain, muscle weakness, increased risk of death from cardiovascular disease, cognitive impairment, asthma in children, cancer</td> </tr> <tr> <td>E <div data-type="newline" data-count="1"><br /></div>tocopherols</td> <td>Seeds, nuts, vegetable oils, avocados, wheat germ</td> <td>15 mg</td> <td>Antioxidant</td> <td>Anemia</td> </tr> <tr> <td>K <div data-type="newline" data-count="1"><br /></div>phylloquinone</td> <td>Dark green leafy vegetables, broccoli, Brussels sprouts, cabbage</td> <td>90–120 <em data-effect="italics">µ</em>g</td> <td>Blood clotting, bone health</td> <td>Hemorrhagic disease of newborn in infants; uncommon in adults</td> </tr> </tbody></table>
<table id="tbl-ch25_04" summary=""><thead> <tr> <th colspan="5">Water-soluble Vitamins</th> </tr> <tr> <th>Vitamin and alternative name</th> <th>Sources</th> <th>Recommended daily allowance</th> <th>Function</th> <th>Problems associated with deficiency</th> </tr> </thead><tbody> <tr> <td>B<sub>1</sub> <div data-type="newline" data-count="1"><br /></div>thiamine</td> <td>Whole grains, enriched bread and cereals, milk, meat</td> <td>1.1–1.2 mg</td> <td>Carbohydrate metabolism</td> <td>Beriberi, Wernicke-Korsikoff syndrome</td> </tr> <tr> <td>B<sub>2</sub> <div data-type="newline" data-count="1"><br /></div>riboflavin</td> <td>Brewer’s yeast, almonds, milk, organ meats, legumes, enriched breads and cereals, broccoli, asparagus</td> <td>1.1–1.3 mg</td> <td>Synthesis of FAD for metabolism, production of red blood cells</td> <td>Fatigue, slowed growth, digestive problems, light sensitivity, epithelial problems like cracks in the corners of the mouth</td> </tr> <tr> <td>B<sub>3</sub> <div data-type="newline" data-count="1"><br /></div>niacin</td> <td>Meat, fish, poultry, enriched breads and cereals, peanuts</td> <td>14–16 mg</td> <td>Synthesis of NAD, nerve function, cholesterol production</td> <td>Cracked, scaly skin; dementia; diarrhea; also known as pellagra</td> </tr> <tr> <td>B<sub>5</sub> <div data-type="newline" data-count="1"><br /></div>pantothenic acid</td> <td>Meat, poultry, potatoes, oats, enriched breads and cereals, tomatoes</td> <td>5 mg</td> <td>Synthesis of coenzyme A in fatty acid metabolism</td> <td>Rare: symptoms may include fatigue, insomnia, depression, irritability</td> </tr> <tr> <td>B<sub>6</sub> <div data-type="newline" data-count="1"><br /></div>pyridoxine</td> <td>Potatoes, bananas, beans, seeds, nuts, meat, poultry, fish, eggs, dark green leafy vegetables, soy, organ meats</td> <td>1.3–1.5 mg</td> <td>Sodium and potassium balance, red blood cell synthesis, protein metabolism</td> <td>Confusion, irritability, depression, mouth and tongue sores</td> </tr> <tr> <td>B<sub>7</sub> <div data-type="newline" data-count="1"><br /></div>biotin</td> <td>Liver, fruits, meats</td> <td>30 <em data-effect="italics">µ</em>g</td> <td>Cell growth, metabolism of fatty acids, production of blood cells</td> <td>Rare in developed countries; symptoms include dermatitis, hair loss, loss of muscular coordination</td> </tr> <tr> <td>B<sub>9</sub> <div data-type="newline" data-count="1"><br /></div>folic acid</td> <td>Liver, legumes, dark green leafy vegetables, enriched breads and cereals, citrus fruits</td> <td>400 <em data-effect="italics">µ</em>g</td> <td>DNA/protein synthesis</td> <td>Poor growth, gingivitis, appetite loss, shortness of breath, gastrointestinal problems, mental deficits</td> </tr> <tr> <td>B<sub>12</sub> <div data-type="newline" data-count="1"><br /></div>cyanocobalamin</td> <td>Fish, meat, poultry, dairy products, eggs</td> <td>2.4 <em data-effect="italics">µ</em>g</td> <td>Fatty acid oxidation, nerve cell function, red blood cell production</td> <td>Pernicious anemia, leading to nerve cell damage</td> </tr> <tr> <td>C <div data-type="newline" data-count="1"><br /></div>ascorbic acid</td> <td>Citrus fruits, red berries, peppers, tomatoes, broccoli, dark green leafy vegetables</td> <td>75–90 mg</td> <td>Necessary to produce collagen for formation of connective tissue and teeth, and for wound healing</td> <td>Dry hair, gingivitis, bleeding gums, dry and scaly skin, slow wound healing, easy bruising, compromised immunity; can lead to scurvy</td> </tr> </tbody></table>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2170180" markdown="1">
# Minerals
{: data-type="title"}

<span data-type="term">Minerals</span> in food are inorganic compounds
that work with other nutrients to ensure the body functions properly.
Minerals cannot be made in the body; they come from the diet. The amount
of minerals in the body is small—only 4 percent of the total body
mass—and most of that consists of the minerals that the body requires in
moderate quantities: potassium, sodium, calcium, phosphorus, magnesium,
and chloride.
{: #fs-id2016827}

The most common minerals in the body are calcium and phosphorous, both
of which are stored in the skeleton and necessary for the hardening of
bones. Most minerals are ionized, and their ionic forms are used in
physiological processes throughout the body. Sodium and chloride ions
are electrolytes in the blood and extracellular tissues, and iron ions
are critical to the formation of hemoglobin. There are additional trace
minerals that are still important to the body’s functions, but their
required quantities are much lower.
{: #fs-id2121045}

Like vitamins, minerals can be consumed in toxic quantities (although it
is rare). A healthy diet includes most of the minerals your body
requires, so supplements and processed foods can add potentially toxic
levels of minerals. [\[link\]](#tbl-ch25_05){: .autogenerated-content}
and [\[link\]](#tbl-ch25_06){: .autogenerated-content} provide a summary
of minerals and their function in the body.
{: #fs-id2286963}

<table id="tbl-ch25_05" summary=""><thead> <tr> <th colspan="5">Major Minerals</th> </tr> <tr> <th>Mineral</th> <th>Sources</th> <th>Recommended daily allowance</th> <th>Function</th> <th>Problems associated with deficiency</th> </tr> </thead><tbody> <tr> <td>Potassium</td> <td>Meats, some fish, fruits, vegetables, legumes, dairy products</td> <td>4700 mg</td> <td>Nerve and muscle function; acts as an electrolyte</td> <td>Hypokalemia: weakness, fatigue, muscle cramping, gastrointestinal problems, cardiac problems</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Sodium</td> <td>Table salt, milk, beets, celery, processed foods</td> <td>2300 mg</td> <td>Blood pressure, blood volume, muscle and nerve function</td> <td>Rare</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Calcium</td> <td>Dairy products, dark green leafy vegetables, blackstrap molasses, nuts, brewer’s yeast, some fish</td> <td>1000 mg</td> <td>Bone structure and health; nerve and muscle functions, especially cardiac function</td> <td>Slow growth, weak and brittle bones</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Phosphorous</td> <td>Meat, milk</td> <td>700 mg</td> <td>Bone formation, metabolism, ATP production</td> <td>Rare</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Magnesium</td> <td>Whole grains, nuts, leafy green vegetables</td> <td>310–420 mg</td> <td>Enzyme activation, production of energy, regulation of other nutrients</td> <td>Agitation, anxiety, sleep problems, nausea and vomiting, abnormal heart rhythms, low blood pressure, muscular problems</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Chloride</td> <td>Most foods, salt, vegetables, especially seaweed, tomatoes, lettuce, celery, olives</td> <td>2300 mg</td> <td>Balance of body fluids, digestion</td> <td>Loss of appetite, muscle cramps</td> </tr> </tbody></table>
<table id="tbl-ch25_06" summary=""><thead> <tr> <th colspan="5">Trace Minerals</th> </tr> <tr> <th>Mineral</th> <th>Sources</th> <th>Recommended daily allowance</th> <th>Function</th> <th>Problems associated with deficiency</th> </tr> </thead><tbody> <tr> <td>Iron</td> <td>Meat, poultry, fish, shellfish, legumes, nuts, seeds, whole grains, dark leafy green vegetables</td> <td>8–18 mg</td> <td>Transport of oxygen in blood, production of ATP</td> <td>Anemia, weakness, fatigue</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Zinc</td> <td>Meat, fish, poultry, cheese, shellfish</td> <td>8–11 mg</td> <td>Immunity, reproduction, growth, blood clotting, insulin and thyroid function</td> <td>Loss of appetite, poor growth, weight loss, skin problems, hair loss, vision problems, lack of taste or smell</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Copper</td> <td>Seafood, organ meats, nuts, legumes, chocolate, enriched breads and cereals, some fruits and vegetables</td> <td>900 <em data-effect="italics">µ</em>g</td> <td>Red blood cell production, nerve and immune system function, collagen formation, acts as an antioxidant</td> <td>Anemia, low body temperature, bone fractures, low white blood cell concentration, irregular heartbeat, thyroid problems</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Iodine</td> <td>Fish, shellfish, garlic, lima beans, sesame seeds, soybeans, dark leafy green vegetables</td> <td>150 <em data-effect="italics">µ</em>g</td> <td>Thyroid function</td> <td>Hypothyroidism: fatigue, weight gain, dry skin, temperature sensitivity</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Sulfur</td> <td>Eggs, meat, poultry, fish, legumes</td> <td>None</td> <td>Component of amino acids</td> <td>Protein deficiency</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Fluoride</td> <td>Fluoridated water</td> <td>3–4 mg</td> <td>Maintenance of bone and tooth structure</td> <td>Increased cavities, weak bones and teeth</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Manganese</td> <td>Nuts, seeds, whole grains, legumes</td> <td>1.8–2.3 mg</td> <td>Formation of connective tissue and bones, blood clotting, sex hormone development, metabolism, brain and nerve function</td> <td>Infertility, bone malformation, weakness, seizures</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Cobalt</td> <td>Fish, nuts, leafy green vegetables, whole grains</td> <td>None</td> <td>Component of B<sub>12</sub></td> <td>None</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Selenium</td> <td>Brewer’s yeast, wheat germ, liver, butter, fish, shellfish, whole grains</td> <td>55 <em data-effect="italics">µ</em>g</td> <td>Antioxidant, thyroid function, immune system function</td> <td>Muscle pain</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Chromium</td> <td>Whole grains, lean meats, cheese, black pepper, thyme, brewer’s yeast</td> <td>25–35 <em data-effect="italics">µ</em>g</td> <td>Insulin function</td> <td>High blood sugar, triglyceride, and cholesterol levels</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Molybdenum</td> <td>Legumes, whole grains, nuts</td> <td>45 <em data-effect="italics">µ</em>g</td> <td>Cofactor for enzymes</td> <td>Rare</td> </tr> </tbody></table>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1475174" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

Nutrition and diet affect your metabolism. More energy is required to
break down fats and proteins than carbohydrates; however, all excess
calories that are ingested will be stored as fat in the body. On
average, a person requires 1500 to 2000 calories for normal daily
activity, although routine exercise will increase that amount. If you
ingest more than that, the remainder is stored for later use.
Conversely, if you ingest less than that, the energy stores in your body
will be depleted. Both the quantity and quality of the food you eat
affect your metabolism and can affect your overall health. Eating too
much or too little can result in serious medical conditions, including
cardiovascular disease, cancer, and diabetes.
{: #fs-id2002032}

Vitamins and minerals are essential parts of the diet. They are needed
for the proper function of metabolic pathways in the body. Vitamins are
not stored in the body, so they must be obtained from the diet or
synthesized from precursors available in the diet. Minerals are also
obtained from the diet, but they are also stored, primarily in skeletal
tissues.
{: #fs-id2530743}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1979715" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id3085772">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1336740" markdown="1">
A deficiency in vitamin A can result in ________.
{: #fs-id2066655}

1.  improper bone development
2.  scurvy
3.  improper eye development or sight
4.  all of the above
{: #fs-id2043992 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id859781" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id3001584}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1985859">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2320394" markdown="1">
Rickets results in improper bone development in children that arises
from the malabsorption of calcium and a deficiency in ________.
{: #fs-id2320395}

1.  vitamin D
2.  vitamin C
3.  vitamin B<sub>12</sub>
4.  niacin
{: #fs-id2589981 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1963826" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id2008591}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1615824">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2318887" markdown="1">
Consuming which type of food will help the most with weight loss?
{: #fs-id1618661}

1.  fats
2.  vegetables
3.  lean meats
4.  fruits
{: #fs-id2022969 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id3090389" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id2887623}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2773895">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2359230" markdown="1">
Which of the following is stored in the body?
{: #fs-id2359231}

1.  thiamine
2.  phosphorous
3.  folic acid
4.  vitamin C
{: #fs-id2881308 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1530964" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id3398544}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1976403" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2535807">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2154654" markdown="1">
Weight loss and weight gain are complex processes. What are some of the
main factors that influence weight gain in people?
{: #fs-id2154655}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1732541" data-label="" markdown="1">
Factors that influence weight gain are food intake (both quantity and
quality), environmental factors, height, exercise level, some drugs or
disease states, and genes.
{: #fs-id2453979}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2802608">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2303670" markdown="1">
Some low-fat or non-fat foods contain a large amount of sugar to replace
the fat content of the food. Discuss how this leads to increased fat in
the body (and weight gain) even though the item is non-fat.
{: #fs-id2303671}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1330315" data-label="" markdown="1">
Although these foods technically do not have fat added, many times a
significant amount of sugar is added to sweeten the food and make it
taste better. These foods are non-fat; however, they can lead to
significant fat storage or weight gain because the excess sugar is
broken down into pyruvate, but overloads the Krebs cycle. When this
happens, the sugar is converted into fat through lipogenesis and stored
in adipose tissues.
{: #fs-id1716504}

</div>
</div>
</section>



