---
title: "Acid-Base Balance"
layout: page
tags: debug
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
* Identify the most powerful buffer system in the body
* Explain the way in which the respiratory system affects blood pH

</div>
Proper physiological functioning depends on a very tight balance between
the concentrations of acids and bases in the blood. Acid-balance balance
is measured using the pH scale, as shown in
[\[link\]](#fig-ch27_04_01){: .autogenerated-content}. A variety of
buffering systems permits blood and other bodily fluids to maintain a
narrow pH range, even in the face of perturbations. A buffer is a
chemical system that prevents a radical change in fluid pH by dampening
the change in hydrogen ion concentrations in the case of excess acid or
base. Most commonly, the substance that absorbs the ions is either a
weak acid, which takes up hydroxyl ions, or a weak base, which takes up
hydrogen ions.

![This table gives examples of solutions from PH of zero to 14. Examples of solutions with a PH of zero include battery acid and strong hydrofluoric acid. An example of a solution with a pH of one is the hydrochloric acid secreted by the stomach lining. Examples of solutions with a PH of two include lemon juice and vinegar. Examples of solutions with a PH of three include grapefruit juice, orange juice and soda. Examples of solutions with a PH of four include tomato juice and acid rain. Examples of solutions with a PH of five include soft drinking water and black coffee. Examples of solutions with a PH of six include urine and saliva. An example of a solution with a PH of seven is pure water. An example of a solution with a PH of eight is sea water. An example of a solution with a PH of nine is baking soda. Examples of solutions with a PH of ten include saline lake water and milk of magnesia. An example of a solution with a PH of eleven is an ammonia solution. An example of a solution with a PH of twelve is soapy water. Examples of solutions with a PH of thirteen include bleach and oven cleaner. An example of a solution with a PH of fourteen is liquid drain cleaner.](../resources/2713_pH_Scale-01.jpg "This chart shows where many common substances fall on the pH scale."){: #fig-ch27_04_01 data-media-type="image/jpg" data-title="The pH Scale "}

# Buffer Systems in the Body

The buffer systems in the human body are extremely efficient, and
different systems work at different rates. It takes only seconds for the
chemical buffers in the blood to make adjustments to pH. The respiratory
tract can adjust the blood pH upward in minutes by exhaling
CO<sub>2</sub> from the body. The renal system can also adjust blood pH
through the excretion of hydrogen ions (H<sup>+</sup>) and the
conservation of bicarbonate, but this process takes hours to days to
have an effect.

The buffer systems functioning in blood plasma include plasma proteins,
phosphate, and bicarbonate and carbonic acid buffers. The kidneys help
control acid-base balance by excreting hydrogen ions and generating
bicarbonate that helps maintain blood plasma pH within a normal range.
Protein buffer systems work predominantly inside cells.

## Protein Buffers in Blood Plasma and Cells

Nearly all proteins can function as buffers. Proteins are made up of
amino acids, which contain positively charged amino groups and
negatively charged carboxyl groups. The charged regions of these
molecules can bind hydrogen and hydroxyl ions, and thus function as
buffers. Buffering by proteins accounts for two-thirds of the buffering
power of the blood and most of the buffering within cells.

## Hemoglobin as a Buffer

Hemoglobin is the principal protein inside of red blood cells and
accounts for one-third of the mass of the cell. During the conversion of
CO<sub>2</sub> into bicarbonate, hydrogen ions liberated in the reaction
are buffered by hemoglobin, which is reduced by the dissociation of
oxygen. This buffering helps maintain normal pH. The process is reversed
in the pulmonary capillaries to re-form CO<sub>2</sub>, which then can
diffuse into the air sacs to be exhaled into the atmosphere. This
process is discussed in detail in the chapter on the respiratory system.

## Phosphate Buffer

Phosphates are found in the blood in two forms: sodium dihydrogen
phosphate (<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"> <mrow>
<msub> <mrow> <mtext>Na</mtext> </mrow> <mn>2</mn> </msub> <msub>
<mtext>H</mtext> <mn>2</mn> </msub> <msub> <mrow> <mtext>PO</mtext>
</mrow> <mn>4</mn> </msub> <msup> <mrow /> <mo>−</mo> </msup> </mrow>
</math>

), which is a weak acid, and sodium monohydrogen phosphate (<math
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="left"> <mrow> <msub>
<mrow> <mtext>Na</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>2</mtext> </msub> <msubsup>
<mrow> <mtext>HPO</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>4</mtext> <mrow>
<mtext>2-</mtext> </mrow> </msubsup> </mrow> </math>

), which is a weak base. When <math
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="left"> <mrow> <msub>
<mrow> <mtext>Na</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>2</mtext> </msub> <msubsup>
<mrow> <mtext>HPO</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>4</mtext> <mrow>
<mtext>2-</mtext> </mrow> </msubsup> </mrow> </math>

 comes into contact with a strong acid, such as HCl, the base picks up a
second hydrogen ion to form the weak acid <math
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"> <mrow> <msub> <mrow>
<mtext>Na</mtext> </mrow> <mn>2</mn> </msub> <msub> <mtext>H</mtext>
<mtext>2</mtext> </msub> <msub> <mrow> <mtext>PO</mtext> </mrow>
<mtext>4</mtext> </msub> <msup> <mrow /> <mo>−</mo> </msup> </mrow>
</math>

 and sodium chloride, NaCl. When <math
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"> <mrow> <msub> <mrow>
<mtext>Na</mtext> </mrow> <mn>2</mn> </msub> <msubsup> <mrow>
<mtext>HPO</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>4</mtext> <mn>2</mn> </msubsup> <msup>
<mrow /> <mo>−</mo> </msup> </mrow> </math>

 (the weak acid) comes into contact with a strong base, such as sodium
hydroxide (NaOH), the weak acid reverts back to the weak base and
produces water. Acids and bases are still present, but they hold onto
the ions.

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-177">
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="block"> <mrow> <msub> <mrow> <mtext>HCl + Na</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>2</mtext> </msub> <msub> <mrow> <mtext>HPO</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>4</mtext> </msub> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">→</mo></mrow> <msub> <mrow> <mtext>NaH</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>2</mtext> </msub> <msub> <mrow> <mtext>PO</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>4</mtext> </msub> <mtext> + NaCl</mtext> </mrow> </math>
</div>
<div data-type="equation" id="eip-75">
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="block"> <mrow> <mtext>(strong acid) + (weak base) </mtext> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">→</mo></mrow> <mtext> (weak acid) + (salt)</mtext> </mrow> </math>
</div>
<div data-type="equation" id="eip-714">
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="block"> <mrow> <msub> <mrow> <mtext>NaOH + NaH</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>2</mtext> </msub> <msub> <mrow> <mtext>PO</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>4</mtext> </msub> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">→</mo></mrow> <msub> <mrow> <mtext>Na</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>2</mtext> </msub> <msub> <mrow> <mtext>HPO</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>4</mtext> </msub> <msub> <mrow> <mtext> + H</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>2</mtext> </msub> <mtext>O</mtext> </mrow> </math>
</div>
<div data-type="equation" id="eip-713">
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="block"> <mrow> <mtext>(strong base) + (weak acid) </mtext> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">→</mo></mrow> <mtext> (weak base) + (water)</mtext> </mrow> </math>
</div>

## Bicarbonate-Carbonic Acid Buffer

The bicarbonate-carbonic acid buffer works in a fashion similar to
phosphate buffers. The bicarbonate is regulated in the blood by sodium,
as are the phosphate ions. When sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO<sub>3</sub>),
comes into contact with a strong acid, such as HCl, carbonic acid
(H<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub>), which is a weak acid, and NaCl are
formed. When carbonic acid comes into contact with a strong base, such
as NaOH, bicarbonate and water are formed.

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-515">
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="block"> <mrow> <msub> <mrow> <mtext>NaHCO</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>3</mtext> </msub> <mtext> + HCl </mtext> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">→</mo></mrow> <msub> <mrow> <mtext>  H</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>2</mtext> </msub> <msub> <mrow> <mtext>CO</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>3</mtext> </msub> <mtext>+NaCl</mtext> </mrow> </math>
</div>
<div data-type="equation" id="eip-562">
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="block"> <mrow> <mtext>(sodium bicarbonate) + (strong acid) </mtext> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">→</mo></mrow> <mtext> (weak acid) + (salt)</mtext> </mrow> </math>
</div>
<div data-type="equation" id="eip-524">
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="block"> <mrow> <msub> <mtext>H</mtext> <mtext>2</mtext> </msub> <msub> <mrow> <mtext>CO</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>3</mtext> </msub> <mtext> + NaOH</mtext> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">→</mo></mrow> <msub> <mrow> <mtext>HCO</mtext> </mrow> <mrow> <mtext>3-</mtext> </mrow> </msub> <msub> <mrow> <mtext> + H</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>2</mtext> </msub> <mtext>O</mtext> </mrow> </math>
</div>
<div data-type="equation" id="eip-207">
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="block"> <mrow> <mtext>(weak acid) + (strong base)</mtext> <mrow><mo stretchy="false">→</mo></mrow> <mtext>(bicarbonate) + (water)</mtext> </mrow> </math>
</div>
As with the phosphate buffer, a weak acid or weak base captures the free
ions, and a significant change in pH is prevented. Bicarbonate ions and
carbonic acid are present in the blood in a 20:1 ratio if the blood pH
is within the normal range. With 20 times more bicarbonate than carbonic
acid, this capture system is most efficient at buffering changes that
would make the blood more acidic. This is useful because most of the
body’s metabolic wastes, such as lactic acid and ketones, are acids.
Carbonic acid levels in the blood are controlled by the expiration of
CO<sub>2</sub> through the lungs. In red blood cells, carbonic anhydrase
forces the dissociation of the acid, rendering the blood less acidic.
Because of this acid dissociation, CO<sub>2</sub> is exhaled (see
equations above). The level of bicarbonate in the blood is controlled
through the renal system, where bicarbonate ions in the renal filtrate
are conserved and passed back into the blood. However, the bicarbonate
buffer is the primary buffering system of the IF surrounding the cells
in tissues throughout the body.

# Respiratory Regulation of Acid-Base Balance

The respiratory system contributes to the balance of acids and bases in
the body by regulating the blood levels of carbonic acid
([\[link\]](#fig-ch27_04_02){: .autogenerated-content}). CO<sub>2
</sub>in the blood readily reacts with water to form carbonic acid, and
the levels of CO<sub>2 </sub>and carbonic acid in the blood are in
equilibrium. When the CO<sub>2 </sub>level in the blood rises (as it
does when you hold your breath), the excess CO<sub>2</sub> reacts with
water to form additional carbonic acid, lowering blood pH. Increasing
the rate and/or depth of respiration (which you might feel the “urge” to
do after holding your breath) allows you to exhale more CO<sub>2</sub>.
The loss of CO<sub>2</sub> from the body reduces blood levels of
carbonic acid and thereby adjusts the pH upward, toward normal levels.
As you might have surmised, this process also works in the opposite
direction. Excessive deep and rapid breathing (as in hyperventilation)
rids the blood of CO<sub>2</sub> and reduces the level of carbonic acid,
making the blood too alkaline. This brief alkalosis can be remedied by
rebreathing air that has been exhaled into a paper bag. Rebreathing
exhaled air will rapidly bring blood pH down toward normal.

![This top to bottom flowchart describes the regulation of PH in the blood. The left branch shows acidosis, which is when the PH of the blood drops. Acidosis stimulates brain and arterial receptors, triggering an increase in respiratory rate. This causes a drop in blood CO two and H two CO three. A drop in these two acidic compounds causes the blood PH to rise back to homeostatic levels. The right branch shows alkalosis which is when the PH of the blood rises. Alkalosis also stimulates brain and arterial receptors, but these now trigger a decrease in respiratory rate. This causes an increase in blood CO two and H two CO three, which lowers the PH of the blood back to homeostatic levels.](../resources/2714_Respiratory_Regulation_of_Blood.jpg "The respiratory system can reduce blood pH by removing CO2 from the blood."){: #fig-ch27_04_02 data-media-type="image/jpg" data-title="Respiratory Regulation of Blood pH "}

The chemical reactions that regulate the levels of CO<sub>2</sub> and
carbonic acid occur in the lungs when blood travels through the lung’s
pulmonary capillaries. Minor adjustments in breathing are usually
sufficient to adjust the pH of the blood by changing how much
CO<sub>2</sub> is exhaled. In fact, doubling the respiratory rate for
less than 1 minute, removing “extra” CO<sub>2</sub>, would increase the
blood pH by 0.2. This situation is common if you are exercising
strenuously over a period of time. To keep up the necessary energy
production, you would produce excess CO<sub>2</sub> (and lactic acid if
exercising beyond your aerobic threshold). In order to balance the
increased acid production, the respiration rate goes up to remove the
CO<sub>2</sub>. This helps to keep you from developing acidosis.

The body regulates the respiratory rate by the use of chemoreceptors,
which primarily use CO<sub>2</sub> as a signal. Peripheral blood sensors
are found in the walls of the aorta and carotid arteries. These sensors
signal the brain to provide immediate adjustments to the respiratory
rate if CO<sub>2 </sub>levels rise or fall. Yet other sensors are found
in the brain itself. Changes in the pH of CSF affect the respiratory
center in the medulla oblongata, which can directly modulate breathing
rate to bring the pH back into the normal range.

<span data-type="term">Hypercapnia</span>, or abnormally elevated blood
levels of CO<sub>2</sub>, occurs in any situation that impairs
respiratory functions, including pneumonia and congestive heart failure.
Reduced breathing (hypoventilation) due to drugs such as morphine,
barbiturates, or ethanol (or even just holding one’s breath) can also
result in hypercapnia. <span data-type="term">Hypocapnia</span>, or
abnormally low blood levels of CO<sub>2</sub>, occurs with any cause of
hyperventilation that drives off the CO<sub>2</sub>, such as salicylate
toxicity, elevated room temperatures, fever, or hysteria.

# Renal Regulation of Acid-Base Balance

The renal regulation of the body’s acid-base balance addresses the
metabolic component of the buffering system. Whereas the respiratory
system (together with breathing centers in the brain) controls the blood
levels of carbonic acid by controlling the exhalation of CO<sub>2</sub>,
the renal system controls the blood levels of bicarbonate. A decrease of
blood bicarbonate can result from the inhibition of carbonic anhydrase
by certain diuretics or from excessive bicarbonate loss due to diarrhea.
Blood bicarbonate levels are also typically lower in people who have
Addison’s disease (chronic adrenal insufficiency), in which aldosterone
levels are reduced, and in people who have renal damage, such as chronic
nephritis. Finally, low bicarbonate blood levels can result from
elevated levels of ketones (common in unmanaged diabetes mellitus),
which bind bicarbonate in the filtrate and prevent its conservation.

Bicarbonate ions, HCO<sub>3</sub><sup>-</sup>, found in the filtrate,
are essential to the bicarbonate buffer system, yet the cells of the
tubule are not permeable to bicarbonate ions. The steps involved in
supplying bicarbonate ions to the system are seen in
[\[link\]](#fig-ch27_04_03){: .autogenerated-content} and are summarized
below:

* Step 1: Sodium ions are reabsorbed from the filtrate in exchange for
  H<sup>+</sup> by an antiport mechanism in the apical membranes of
  cells lining the renal tubule.
* Step 2: The cells produce bicarbonate ions that can be shunted to
  peritubular capillaries.
* Step 3: When CO<sub>2</sub> is available, the reaction is driven to
  the formation of carbonic acid, which dissociates to form a
  bicarbonate ion and a hydrogen ion.
* Step 4: The bicarbonate ion passes into the peritubular capillaries
  and returns to the blood. The hydrogen ion is secreted into the
  filtrate, where it can become part of new water molecules and be
  reabsorbed as such, or removed in the urine.

![This diagram depicts a cross section of the left wall of a kidney proximal tubule. The wall is composed of two block-shaped cells arranged vertically one on top of each other. The lumen of the proximal tubule is to the left of the two cells. Yellow-colored urine is flowing through the lumen. There is a small strip of blue interstitial fluid to the right of the two cells. To the right of the interstitial fluid is a cross section of a blood vessel. A loop of chemical reactions is occurring in the diagram. Within the lumen of the proximal tubule, HCO three minus is combining with an H plus ion that enters the lumen from a proximal tubule cell. This reaction forms H two CO three. H two CO three then breaks into H two O and CO two, a reaction catalyzed by the enzyme carbonic anhydrase. The CO two then moves from the lumen of the proximal tubule into one of the proximal tubule cells. There, the reaction runs in reverse, with CO two combining with H two O to form H two CO three. The H two CO three then splits into H plus and HCO three minus. The H plus moves into the lumen, reinitiating the first step of the loop. The HCO three minus leaves the proximal tubule cell and enters the blood stream.](../resources/2715_Conservation_of_Bicarbonate_in_Kidney-01.jpg "Tubular cells are not permeable to bicarbonate; thus, bicarbonate is conserved rather than reabsorbed. Steps 1 and 2 of bicarbonate conservation are indicated."){: #fig-ch27_04_03 data-media-type="image/jpg" data-title="Conservation of Bicarbonate in the Kidney "}

It is also possible that salts in the filtrate, such as sulfates,
phosphates, or ammonia, will capture hydrogen ions. If this occurs, the
hydrogen ions will not be available to combine with bicarbonate ions and
produce CO<sub>2</sub>. In such cases, bicarbonate ions are not
conserved from the filtrate to the blood, which will also contribute to
a pH imbalance and acidosis.

The hydrogen ions also compete with potassium to exchange with sodium in
the renal tubules. If more potassium is present than normal, potassium,
rather than the hydrogen ions, will be exchanged, and increased
potassium enters the filtrate. When this occurs, fewer hydrogen ions in
the filtrate participate in the conversion of bicarbonate into
CO<sub>2</sub> and less bicarbonate is conserved. If there is less
potassium, more hydrogen ions enter the filtrate to be exchanged with
sodium and more bicarbonate is conserved.

Chloride ions are important in neutralizing positive ion charges in the
body. If chloride is lost, the body uses bicarbonate ions in place of
the lost chloride ions. Thus, lost chloride results in an increased
reabsorption of bicarbonate by the renal system.

<div data-type="note" class="anatomy disorders" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Disorders of the…
</div>
<span data-type="title">Acid-Base Balance: Ketoacidosis</span>Diabetic
acidosis, or ketoacidosis, occurs most frequently in people with poorly
controlled diabetes mellitus. When certain tissues in the body cannot
get adequate amounts of glucose, they depend on the breakdown of fatty
acids for energy. When acetyl groups break off the fatty acid chains,
the acetyl groups then non-enzymatically combine to form ketone bodies,
acetoacetic acid, beta-hydroxybutyric acid, and acetone, all of which
increase the acidity of the blood. In this condition, the brain isn’t
supplied with enough of its fuel—glucose—to produce all of the ATP it
requires to function.

Ketoacidosis can be severe and, if not detected and treated properly,
can lead to diabetic coma, which can be fatal. A common early symptom of
ketoacidosis is deep, rapid breathing as the body attempts to drive off
CO<sub>2</sub> and compensate for the acidosis. Another common symptom
is fruity-smelling breath, due to the exhalation of acetone. Other
symptoms include dry skin and mouth, a flushed face, nausea, vomiting,
and stomach pain. Treatment for diabetic coma is ingestion or injection
of sugar; its prevention is the proper daily administration of insulin.

A person who is diabetic and uses insulin can initiate ketoacidosis if a
dose of insulin is missed. Among people with type 2 diabetes, those of
Hispanic and African-American descent are more likely to go into
ketoacidosis than those of other ethnic backgrounds, although the reason
for this is unknown.

</div>

# Chapter Review

A variety of buffering systems exist in the body that helps maintain the
pH of the blood and other fluids within a narrow range—between pH 7.35
and 7.45. A buffer is a substance that prevents a radical change in
fluid pH by absorbing excess hydrogen or hydroxyl ions. Most commonly,
the substance that absorbs the ion is either a weak acid, which takes up
a hydroxyl ion (OH<sup>-</sup>), or a weak base, which takes up a
hydrogen ion (H<sup>+</sup>). Several substances serve as buffers in the
body, including cell and plasma proteins, hemoglobin, phosphates,
bicarbonate ions, and carbonic acid. The bicarbonate buffer is the
primary buffering system of the IF surrounding the cells in tissues
throughout the body. The respiratory and renal systems also play major
roles in acid-base homeostasis by removing CO<sub>2</sub> and hydrogen
ions, respectively, from the body.

# Review Questions

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Which of the following is the most important buffer inside red blood
cells?

1.  plasma proteins
2.  hemoglobin
3.  phosphate buffers
4.  bicarbonate: carbonic acid buffer
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
B

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Which explanation best describes why plasma proteins can function as
buffers?

1.  Plasma proteins combine with bicarbonate to make a stronger buffer.
2.  Plasma proteins are immune to damage from acids.
3.  Proteins have both positive and negative charges on their surface.
4.  Proteins are alkaline.
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
C

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
The buffer that is adjusted to control acid-base balance is ________.

1.  plasma protein
2.  hemoglobin
3.  phosphate buffer
4.  bicarbonate: carbonic acid buffer
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
D

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Carbonic acid levels are controlled through the ________.

1.  respiratory system
2.  renal system
3.  digestive system
4.  metabolic rate of cells
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
A

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Bicarbonate ion concentrations in the blood are controlled through the
________.

1.  respiratory system
2.  renal system
3.  digestive system
4.  metabolic rate of cells
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
B

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Which reaction is catalyzed by carbonic anhydrase?

1.  <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="left"> <mrow> <msubsup> <mrow> <mtext>HPO</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>4</mtext> <mrow> <mtext>2-</mtext> </mrow> </msubsup> <msup> <mrow> <mtext>+H</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>+</mtext> </msup> <mrow> <mo stretchy="false">↔</mo> </mrow> <msub> <mtext>H</mtext> <mtext>2</mtext> </msub> <msub> <mrow> <mtext>PO</mtext> </mrow> <mrow> <mtext>4-</mtext> </mrow> </msub> </mrow> </math>

2.  <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="left"> <mrow> <msub> <mrow> <mtext>CO</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>2</mtext> </msub> <msub> <mrow> <mtext> + H</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>2</mtext> </msub> <mtext>O</mtext> <mrow> <mo stretchy="false">↔</mo> </mrow> <msub> <mtext>H</mtext> <mtext>2</mtext> </msub> <msub> <mrow> <mtext>CO</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>3</mtext> </msub> </mrow> </math>

3.  <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="left"> <mrow> <msub> <mtext>H</mtext> <mtext>2</mtext> </msub> <msub> <mrow> <mtext>PO</mtext> </mrow> <mrow> <mtext>4</mtext><mo>−</mo> </mrow> </msub> <msup> <mrow> <mtext>+OH</mtext> </mrow> <mo>−</mo> </msup> <mrow> <mo stretchy="false">↔</mo> </mrow> <msubsup> <mrow> <mtext>HPO</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>4</mtext> <mrow> <mtext>2</mtext><mo>−</mo> </mrow> </msubsup> <msub> <mrow> <mtext>+H</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>2</mtext> </msub> <mtext>O</mtext> </mrow> </math>

4.  <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="left"> <mrow> <msub> <mtext>H</mtext> <mtext>2</mtext> </msub> <msub> <mrow> <mtext>CO</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>3</mtext> </msub> <mrow> <mo stretchy="false">↔</mo> </mrow> <msub> <mrow> <mtext>HCO</mtext> </mrow> <mrow> <mn>3</mn><mo>−</mo> </mrow> </msub> <msup> <mrow> <mtext>+ H</mtext> </mrow> <mo>+</mo> </msup> </mrow> </math>
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
B

</div>
</div>

# Critical Thinking Questions

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Describe the conservation of bicarbonate ions in the renal system.

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
Bicarbonate ions are freely filtered through the glomerulus. They cannot
pass freely into the renal tubular cells and must be converted into
CO<sub>2</sub> in the filtrate, which can pass through the cell
membrane. Sodium ions are reabsorbed at the membrane, and hydrogen ions
are expelled into the filtrate. The hydrogen ions combine with
bicarbonate, forming carbonic acid, which dissociates into
CO<sub>2</sub> gas and water. The gas diffuses into the renal cells
where carbonic anhydrase catalyzes its conversion back into a
bicarbonate ion, which enters the blood.

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Describe the control of blood carbonic acid levels through the
respiratory system.

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
Carbonic acid blood levels are controlled through the respiratory system
by the expulsion of CO<sub>2</sub> from the lungs. The formula for the
production of bicarbonate ions is reversible if the concentration of
CO<sub>2</sub> decreases. As this happens in the lungs, carbonic acid is
converted into a gas, and the concentration of the acid decreases. The
rate of respiration determines the amount of CO<sub>2</sub> exhaled. If
the rate increases, less acid is in the blood; if the rate decreases,
the blood can become more acidic.

</div>
</div>

