---
title: Protein Metabolism
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Describe how the body digests proteins
* Explain how the urea cycle prevents toxic concentrations of nitrogen
* Differentiate between glucogenic and ketogenic amino acids
* Explain how protein can be used for energy

</div>
Much of the body is made of protein, and these proteins take on a myriad
of forms. They represent cell signaling receptors, signaling molecules,
structural members, enzymes, intracellular trafficking components,
extracellular matrix scaffolds, ion pumps, ion channels, oxygen and
CO<sub>2</sub> transporters (hemoglobin). That is not even the complete
list! There is protein in bones (collagen), muscles, and tendons; the
hemoglobin that transports oxygen; and enzymes that catalyze all
biochemical reactions. Protein is also used for growth and repair. Amid
all these necessary functions, proteins also hold the potential to serve
as a metabolic fuel source. Proteins are not stored for later use, so
excess proteins must be converted into glucose or triglycerides, and
used to supply energy or build energy reserves. Although the body can
synthesize proteins from amino acids, food is an important source of
those amino acids, especially because humans cannot synthesize all of
the 20 amino acids used to build proteins.
{: #fs-id1617940}

The digestion of proteins begins in the stomach. When protein-rich foods
enter the stomach, they are greeted by a mixture of the enzyme <span
data-type="term">pepsin</span> and hydrochloric acid (HCl; 0.5 percent).
The latter produces an environmental pH of 1.5–3.5 that denatures
proteins within food. Pepsin cuts proteins into smaller polypeptides and
their constituent amino acids. When the food-gastric juice mixture
(chyme) enters the small intestine, the pancreas releases <span
data-type="term">sodium bicarbonate</span> to neutralize the HCl. This
helps to protect the lining of the intestine. The small intestine also
releases digestive hormones, including <span
data-type="term">secretin</span> and CCK, which stimulate digestive
processes to break down the proteins further. Secretin also stimulates
the pancreas to release sodium bicarbonate. The pancreas releases most
of the digestive enzymes, including the proteases trypsin, chymotrypsin,
and <span data-type="term">elastase</span>, which aid protein digestion.
Together, all of these enzymes break complex proteins into smaller
individual amino acids ([\[link\]](#fig-ch25_04_01){:
.autogenerated-content}), which are then transported across the
intestinal mucosa to be used to create new proteins, or to be converted
into fats or acetyl CoA and used in the Krebs cycle.
{: #fs-id2864299}

<figure id="fig-ch25_04_01">
<div data-type="title">
Digestive Enzymes and Hormones
</div>
<figcaption>
Enzymes in the stomach and small intestine break down proteins into
amino acids. HCl in the stomach aids in proteolysis, and hormones
secreted by intestinal cells direct the digestive processes.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2511820" data-alt="The left panel shows
the main organs of the digestive system, and the right panel shows a
magnified view of the intestine. Text callouts indicate the different
protein digesting enzymes produced in different organs."> ![The left
panel shows the main organs of the digestive system, and the right panel
shows a magnified view of the intestine. Text callouts indicate the
different protein digesting enzymes produced in different
organs.](../resources/2517_Protein-Digesting_EnzymesN.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="500"} </span>
</figure>
In order to avoid breaking down the proteins that make up the pancreas
and small intestine, pancreatic enzymes are released as <span
data-type="term">inactive proenzymes</span> that are only activated in
the small intestine. In the pancreas, vesicles store <span
data-type="term">trypsin</span> and <span
data-type="term">chymotrypsin</span> as <span
data-type="term">trypsinogen</span> and <span
data-type="term">chymotrypsinogen</span>. Once released into the small
intestine, an enzyme found in the wall of the small intestine, called
<span data-type="term">enterokinase</span>, binds to trypsinogen and
converts it into its active form, trypsin. Trypsin then binds to
chymotrypsinogen to convert it into the active chymotrypsin. Trypsin and
chymotrypsin break down large proteins into smaller peptides, a process
called <span data-type="term">proteolysis</span>. These smaller peptides
are catabolized into their constituent amino acids, which are
transported across the apical surface of the intestinal mucosa in a
process that is mediated by sodium-amino acid transporters. These
transporters bind sodium and then bind the amino acid to transport it
across the membrane. At the basal surface of the mucosal cells, the
sodium and amino acid are released. The sodium can be reused in the
transporter, whereas the amino acids are transferred into the
bloodstream to be transported to the liver and cells throughout the body
for protein synthesis.
{: #fs-id1265347}

Freely available amino acids are used to create proteins. If amino acids
exist in excess, the body has no capacity or mechanism for their
storage; thus, they are converted into glucose or ketones, or they are
decomposed. Amino acid decomposition results in hydrocarbons and
nitrogenous waste. However, high concentrations of nitrogen are toxic.
The urea cycle processes nitrogen and facilitates its excretion from the
body.
{: #fs-id2508882}

<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1527929" markdown="1">
# Urea Cycle
{: data-type="title"}

The <span data-type="term">urea cycle</span> is a set of biochemical
reactions that produces urea from ammonium ions in order to prevent a
toxic level of ammonium in the body. It occurs primarily in the liver
and, to a lesser extent, in the kidney. Prior to the urea cycle,
ammonium ions are produced from the breakdown of amino acids. In these
reactions, an amine group, or ammonium ion, from the amino acid is
exchanged with a keto group on another molecule. This <span
data-type="term">transamination</span> event creates a molecule that is
necessary for the Krebs cycle and an ammonium ion that enters into the
urea cycle to be eliminated.
{: #fs-id2189300}

In the urea cycle, ammonium is combined with CO<sub>2</sub>, resulting
in urea and water. The urea is eliminated through the kidneys in the
urine ([\[link\]](#fig-ch25_04_02){: .autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id2674976}

<figure id="fig-ch25_04_02">
<div data-type="title">
Urea Cycle
</div>
<figcaption>
Nitrogen is transaminated, creating ammonia and intermediates of the
Krebs cycle. Ammonia is processed in the urea cycle to produce urea that
is eliminated through the kidneys.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2726180" data-alt="This image shows the
reactions of the urea cycle and the organelles in which they take
place."> ![This image shows the reactions of the urea cycle and the
organelles in which they take
place.](../resources/2518_Urea_Cycle.jpg){: data-media-type="image/jpg"
width="520"} </span>
</figure>
Amino acids can also be used as a source of energy, especially in times
of starvation. Because the processing of amino acids results in the
creation of metabolic intermediates, including pyruvate, acetyl CoA,
acetoacyl CoA, oxaloacetate, and α-ketoglutarate, amino acids can serve
as a source of energy production through the Krebs cycle
([\[link\]](#fig-ch25_04_03){: .autogenerated-content}).
[\[link\]](#fig-ch25_04_04){: .autogenerated-content} summarizes the
pathways of catabolism and anabolism for carbohydrates, lipids, and
proteins.
{: #fs-id3342803}

<figure id="fig-ch25_04_03">
<div data-type="title">
Energy from Amino Acids
</div>
<figcaption>
Amino acids can be broken down into precursors for glycolysis or the
Krebs cycle. Amino acids (in bold) can enter the cycle through more than
one pathway.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2476278" data-alt="This figure shows
the different reactions in which products of carbohydrate breakdown are
converted into different amino acids."> ![This figure shows the
different reactions in which products of carbohydrate breakdown are
converted into different amino
acids.](../resources/2519_Energy_From_Amino_Acids.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="550"} </span>
</figure>
<figure id="fig-ch25_04_04">
<div data-type="title">
Catabolic and Anabolic Pathways
</div>
<figcaption>
Nutrients follow a complex pathway from ingestion through anabolism and
catabolism to energy production.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1511188" data-alt="This diagram shows
the different metabolic pathways, and how they are connected."> ![This
diagram shows the different metabolic pathways, and how they are
connected.](../resources/2520_Catabolic_and_Anabolic Pathways.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="560"} </span>
</figure>
<div data-type="note" id="fs-id1930160" class="anatomy disorders" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Disorders of the...
</div>
<span data-type="title">Metabolism: Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex
Deficiency and Phenylketonuria</span> Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex
deficiency (PDCD) and phenylketonuria (PKU) are genetic disorders.
Pyruvate dehydrogenase is the enzyme that converts pyruvate into acetyl
CoA, the molecule necessary to begin the Krebs cycle to produce ATP.
With low levels of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC), the rate of
cycling through the Krebs cycle is dramatically reduced. This results in
a decrease in the total amount of energy that is produced by the cells
of the body. PDC deficiency results in a neurodegenerative disease that
ranges in severity, depending on the levels of the PDC enzyme. It may
cause developmental defects, muscle spasms, and death. Treatments can
include diet modification, vitamin supplementation, and gene therapy;
however, damage to the central nervous system usually cannot be
reversed.
{: #fs-id1933763}

PKU affects about 1 in every 15,000 births in the United States. People
afflicted with PKU lack sufficient activity of the enzyme phenylalanine
hydroxylase and are therefore unable to break down phenylalanine into
tyrosine adequately. Because of this, levels of phenylalanine rise to
toxic levels in the body, which results in damage to the central nervous
system and brain. Symptoms include delayed neurological development,
hyperactivity, mental retardation, seizures, skin rash, tremors, and
uncontrolled movements of the arms and legs. Pregnant women with PKU are
at a high risk for exposing the fetus to too much phenylalanine, which
can cross the placenta and affect fetal development. Babies exposed to
excess phenylalanine in utero may present with heart defects, physical
and/or mental retardation, and microcephaly. Every infant in the United
States and Canada is tested at birth to determine whether PKU is
present. The earlier a modified diet is begun, the less severe the
symptoms will be. The person must closely follow a strict diet that is
low in phenylalanine to avoid symptoms and damage. Phenylalanine is
found in high concentrations in artificial sweeteners, including
aspartame. Therefore, these sweeteners must be avoided. Some animal
products and certain starches are also high in phenylalanine, and intake
of these foods should be carefully monitored.
{: #fs-id1269891}

</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2123231" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

Digestion of proteins begins in the stomach, where HCl and pepsin begin
the process of breaking down proteins into their constituent amino
acids. As the chyme enters the small intestine, it mixes with
bicarbonate and digestive enzymes. The bicarbonate neutralizes the
acidic HCl, and the digestive enzymes break down the proteins into
smaller peptides and amino acids. Digestive hormones secretin and CCK
are released from the small intestine to aid in digestive processes, and
digestive proenzymes are released from the pancreas (trypsinogen and
chymotrypsinogen). Enterokinase, an enzyme located in the wall of the
small intestine, activates trypsin, which in turn activates
chymotrypsin. These enzymes liberate the individual amino acids that are
then transported via sodium-amino acid transporters across the
intestinal wall into the cell. The amino acids are then transported into
the bloodstream for dispersal to the liver and cells throughout the body
to be used to create new proteins. When in excess, the amino acids are
processed and stored as glucose or ketones. The nitrogen waste that is
liberated in this process is converted to urea in the urea acid cycle
and eliminated in the urine. In times of starvation, amino acids can be
used as an energy source and processed through the Krebs cycle.
{: #fs-id2213334}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2320580" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2041938">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1997947" markdown="1">
Digestion of proteins begins in the ________ where ________ and ________
mix with food to break down protein into ________.
{: #fs-id1438518}

1.  stomach; amylase; HCl; amino acids
2.  mouth; pepsin; HCl; fatty acids
3.  stomach; lipase; HCl; amino acids
4.  stomach; pepsin; HCl; amino acids
{: #fs-id2162812 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1716420" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id2506391}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2058342">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1626773" markdown="1">
Amino acids are needed to ________.
{: #fs-id1492841}

1.  build new proteins
2.  serve as fat stores
3.  supply energy for the cell
4.  create red blood cells
{: #fs-id2467594 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1976853" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id2059503}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1863134">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2391971" markdown="1">
If an amino acid is not used to create new proteins, it can be ________.
{: #fs-id3335704}

1.  converted to acetyl CoA
2.  converted to glucose or ketones
3.  converted to nitrogen
4.  stored to be used later
{: #fs-id2068669 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1332013" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id1615111}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1611243" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2469597">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1750106" markdown="1">
Amino acids are not stored in the body. Describe how excess amino acids
are processed in the cell.
{: #fs-id1720020}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1387774" data-label="" markdown="1">
Amino acids are not stored in the body. The individual amino acids are
broken down into pyruvate, acetyl CoA, or intermediates of the Krebs
cycle, and used for energy or for lipogenesis reactions to be stored as
fats.
{: #fs-id1983729}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2181977">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id858356" markdown="1">
Release of trypsin and chymotrypsin in their active form can result in
the digestion of the pancreas or small intestine itself. What mechanism
does the body employ to prevent its self-destruction?
{: #fs-id1815886}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1479835" data-label="" markdown="1">
Trypsin and chymotrypsin are released as inactive proenzymes. They are
only activated in the small intestine, where they act upon ingested
proteins in the food. This helps avoid unintended breakdown of the
pancreas or small intestine.
{: #fs-id3049727}

</div>
</div>
</section>



