---
title: Endocrine Regulation of Kidney Function
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Describe how each of the following functions in the extrinsic control
  of GFR: renin–angiotensin mechanism, natriuretic peptides, and
  sympathetic adrenergic activity
* Describe how each of the following works to regulate reabsorption and
  secretion, so as to affect urine volume and composition:
  renin–angiotensin system, aldosterone, antidiuretic hormone, and
  natriuretic peptides
* Name and define the roles of other hormones that regulate kidney
  control

</div>
Several hormones have specific, important roles in regulating kidney
function. They act to stimulate or inhibit blood flow. Some of these are
endocrine, acting from a distance, whereas others are paracrine, acting
locally.
{: #fs-id2198084}

<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2459453" markdown="1">
# Renin–Angiotensin–Aldosterone
{: data-type="title"}

Renin is an enzyme that is produced by the granular cells of the
afferent arteriole at the JGA. It enzymatically converts angiotensinogen
(made by the liver, freely circulating) into angiotensin I. Its release
is stimulated by prostaglandins and NO from the JGA in response to
decreased extracellular fluid volume.
{: #fs-id2918187}

ACE is not a hormone but it is functionally important in regulating
systemic blood pressure and kidney function. It is produced in the lungs
but binds to the surfaces of endothelial cells in the afferent
arterioles and glomerulus. It enzymatically converts inactive
angiotensin I into active angiotensin II. ACE is important in raising
blood pressure. People with high blood pressure are sometimes prescribed
ACE inhibitors to lower their blood pressure.
{: #fs-id2582099}

Angiotensin II is a potent vasoconstrictor that plays an immediate role
in the regulation of blood pressure. It acts systemically to cause
vasoconstriction as well as constriction of both the afferent and
efferent arterioles of the glomerulus. In instances of blood loss or
dehydration, it reduces both GFR and renal blood flow, thereby limiting
fluid loss and preserving blood volume. Its release is usually
stimulated by decreases in blood pressure, and so the preservation of
adequate blood pressure is its primary role.
{: #fs-id1260018}

Aldosterone, often called the “salt-retaining hormone,” is released from
the adrenal cortex in response to angiotensin II or directly in response
to increased plasma K<sup>+</sup>. It promotes Na<sup>+</sup>
reabsorption by the nephron, promoting the retention of water. It is
also important in regulating K<sup>+</sup>,<sup> </sup>promoting its
excretion. (This dual effect on two minerals and its origin in the
adrenal cortex explains its designation as a mineralocorticoid.) As a
result, renin has an immediate effect on blood pressure due to
angiotensin II–stimulated vasoconstriction and a prolonged effect
through Na<sup>+</sup> recovery due to aldosterone. At the same time
that aldosterone causes increased recovery of Na<sup>+</sup>, it also
causes greater loss of K<sup>+</sup>. Progesterone is a steroid that is
structurally similar to aldosterone. It binds to the aldosterone
receptor and weakly stimulates Na<sup>+</sup> reabsorption and increased
water recovery. This process is unimportant in men due to low levels of
circulating progesterone. It may cause increased retention of water
during some periods of the menstrual cycle in women when progesterone
levels increase.
{: #fs-id2578078}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2587912" markdown="1">
# Antidiuretic Hormone (ADH)
{: data-type="title"}

Diuretics are drugs that can increase water loss by interfering with the
recapture of solutes and water from the forming urine. They are often
prescribed to lower blood pressure. Coffee, tea, and alcoholic beverages
are familiar diuretics. ADH, a 9-amino acid peptide released by the
posterior pituitary, works to do the exact opposite. It promotes the
recovery of water, decreases urine volume, and maintains plasma
osmolarity and blood pressure. It does so by stimulating the movement of
aquaporin proteins into the apical cell membrane of principal cells of
the collecting ducts to form water channels, allowing the transcellular
movement of water from the lumen of the collecting duct into the
interstitial space in the medulla of the kidney by osmosis. From there,
it enters the vasa recta capillaries to return to the circulation. Water
is attracted by the high osmotic environment of the deep kidney medulla.
{: #fs-id2405076}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2288002" markdown="1">
# Endothelin
{: data-type="title"}

<span data-type="term">Endothelins</span>, 21-amino acid peptides, are
extremely powerful vasoconstrictors. They are produced by endothelial
cells of the renal blood vessels, mesangial cells, and cells of the DCT.
Hormones stimulating endothelin release include angiotensin II,
bradykinin, and epinephrine. They do not typically influence blood
pressure in healthy people. On the other hand, in people with diabetic
kidney disease, endothelin is chronically elevated, resulting in sodium
retention. They also diminish GFR by damaging the podocytes and by
potently vasoconstricting both the afferent and efferent arterioles.
{: #fs-id1841833}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2019825" markdown="1">
# Natriuretic Hormones
{: data-type="title"}

Natriuretic hormones are peptides that stimulate the kidneys to excrete
sodium—an effect opposite that of aldosterone. Natriuretic hormones act
by inhibiting aldosterone release and therefore inhibiting
Na<sup>+</sup> recovery in the collecting ducts. If Na<sup>+</sup>
remains in the forming urine, its osmotic force will cause a concurrent
loss of water. Natriuretic hormones also inhibit ADH release, which of
course will result in less water recovery. Therefore, natriuretic
peptides inhibit both Na<sup>+</sup> and water recovery. One example
from this family of hormones is atrial natriuretic hormone (ANH), a
28-amino acid peptide produced by heart atria in response to
over-stretching of the atrial wall. The over-stretching occurs in
persons with elevated blood pressure or heart failure. It increases GFR
through concurrent vasodilation of the afferent arteriole and
vasoconstriction of the efferent arteriole. These events lead to an
increased loss of water and sodium in the forming urine. It also
decreases sodium reabsorption in the DCT. There is also B-type
natriuretic peptide (BNP) of 32 amino acids produced in the ventricles
of the heart. It has a 10-fold lower affinity for its receptor, so its
effects are less than those of ANH. Its role may be to provide “fine
tuning” for the regulation of blood pressure. BNP’s longer biologic
half-life makes it a good diagnostic marker of congestive heart failure
([\[link\]](#fig-ch26_08_01){: .autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id2001840}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2100998" markdown="1">
# Parathyroid Hormone
{: data-type="title"}

Parathyroid hormone (PTH) is an 84-amino acid peptide produced by the
parathyroid glands in response to decreased circulating Ca<sup>++</sup>
levels. Among its targets is the PCT, where it stimulates the
hydroxylation of calcidiol to calcitriol (1,25-hydroxycholecalciferol,
the active form of vitamin D). It also blocks reabsorption of phosphate
(PO<sub>3</sub><sup>–</sup>), causing its loss in the urine. The
retention of phosphate would result in the formation of calcium
phosphate in the plasma, reducing circulating Ca<sup>++</sup> levels. By
ridding the blood of phosphate, higher circulating Ca<sup>++</sup>
levels are permitted.
{: #fs-id2267360}

<figure id="fig-ch26_08_01">
<div data-type="title">
Major Hormones That Influence GFR and RFB
</div>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2753152" data-alt="This table shows the
stimulus, effect on GFR (glomerular filtration rate), and effect on RBF
(renal blood flow) for a variety of vasoconstrictors and vasodilators.
The first vasoconstrictor is input from the sympathetic nerves that
result in the secretion of epinephrine and norepinephrine. The stimulus
is a decrease in extracellular fluid volume (ECFV). The second
vasoconstrictor is angiotensin II. The stimulus is a decrease in ECFV.
The third vasoconstrictor is endothelin. The stimulus is an increase in
stretch, bradykinin, angiotensin II, and epinephrine along with a
decrease in ECFV. All three of these vasoconstrictors decrease GFR and
also decrease RBF. The first vasodilator is the prostaglandins PGE1,
PGE2, and PGI2. The stimulus is a decrease in ECFV, an increase in shear
stress, and an increase in angiotensin II. The second vasodilator is
nitric oxide (NO). The stimulus is increasing shear stress,
acetylcholine, histamine, bradykinin, ATP, and adenosine. The third
vasodilator is bradykinin. The stimulus is the presence of
prostaglandins and a decrease in angiotensin-converting enzyme. The
fourth vasodilator is natriuretic peptides, including ANP and B-type.
The stimulus is an increase in ECFV. All four of the vasodilators
increase GFR and also increase RBF, with the exception of the
natriuretic peptides, which cause no change in RBF. Prostaglandins also
either increase or have no effect on GFR. "> ![This table shows the
stimulus, effect on GFR (glomerular filtration rate), and effect on RBF
(renal blood flow) for a variety of vasoconstrictors and vasodilators.
The first vasoconstrictor is input from the sympathetic nerves that
result in the secretion of epinephrine and norepinephrine. The stimulus
is a decrease in extracellular fluid volume (ECFV). The second
vasoconstrictor is angiotensin II. The stimulus is a decrease in ECFV.
The third vasoconstrictor is endothelin. The stimulus is an increase in
stretch, bradykinin, angiotensin II, and epinephrine along with a
decrease in ECFV. All three of these vasoconstrictors decrease GFR and
also decrease RBF. The first vasodilator is the prostaglandins PGE1,
PGE2, and PGI2. The stimulus is a decrease in ECFV, an increase in shear
stress, and an increase in angiotensin II. The second vasodilator is
nitric oxide (NO). The stimulus is increasing shear stress,
acetylcholine, histamine, bradykinin, ATP, and adenosine. The third
vasodilator is bradykinin. The stimulus is the presence of
prostaglandins and a decrease in angiotensin-converting enzyme. The
fourth vasodilator is natriuretic peptides, including ANP and B-type.
The stimulus is an increase in ECFV. All four of the vasodilators
increase GFR and also increase RBF, with the exception of the
natriuretic peptides, which cause no change in RBF. Prostaglandins also
either increase or have no effect on GFR.
](../resources/2629_Major_Hormones_that_Influence_GFR_and_Renal_Blood_Flow.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="475"} </span>
</figure>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2175912" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

Endocrine hormones act from a distance and paracrine hormones act
locally. The renal enzyme renin converts angiotensinogen into
angiotensin I. The lung enzyme, ACE, converts angiotensin I into active
angiotensin II. Angiotensin II is an active vasoconstrictor that
increases blood pressure. Angiotensin II also stimulates aldosterone
release from the adrenal cortex, causing the collecting duct to retain
Na<sup>+</sup>, which promotes water retention and a longer-term rise in
blood pressure. ADH promotes water recovery by the collecting ducts by
stimulating the insertion of aquaporin water channels into cell
membranes. Endothelins are elevated in cases of diabetic kidney disease,
increasing Na<sup>+</sup> retention and decreasing GFR. Natriuretic
hormones, released primarily from the atria of the heart in response to
stretching of the atrial walls, stimulate Na<sup>+</sup> excretion and
thereby decrease blood pressure. PTH stimulates the final step in the
formation of active vitamin D3 and reduces phosphate reabsorption,
resulting in higher circulating Ca<sup>++</sup> levels.
{: #fs-id2521619}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1881350" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1530205">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2848303" markdown="1">
What hormone directly opposes the actions of natriuretic hormones?
{: #fs-id2789975}

1.  renin
2.  nitric oxide
3.  dopamine
4.  aldosterone
{: #fs-id2634203 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1753269" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id2573777}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1968776">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1910441" markdown="1">
Which of these is a vasoconstrictor?
{: #fs-id2433958}

1.  nitric oxide
2.  natriuretic hormone
3.  bradykinin
4.  angiotensin II
{: #fs-id1574261 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2614426" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id2586499}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2484096">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2045450" markdown="1">
What signal causes the heart to secrete atrial natriuretic hormone?
{: #fs-id2723205}

1.  increased blood pressure
2.  decreased blood pressure
3.  increased Na<sup>+</sup> levels
4.  decreased Na<sup>+</sup> levels
{: #fs-id2069835 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2788562" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id2459118}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2582486" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2052496">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1926689" markdown="1">
What organs produce which hormones or enzymes in the renin–angiotensin
system?
{: #fs-id2065661}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1521257" data-label="" markdown="1">
The liver produces angiotensinogen, the lungs produce ACE, and the
kidneys produce renin.
{: #fs-id1525960}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2240187">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2488825" markdown="1">
PTH affects absorption and reabsorption of what?
{: #fs-id1644340}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2568688" data-label="" markdown="1">
PTH affects absorption and reabsorption of calcium.
{: #fs-id1368088}

</div>
</div>
</section>



