---
title: Lipid Metabolism
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Explain how energy can be derived from fat
* Explain the purpose and process of ketogenesis
* Describe the process of ketone body oxidation
* Explain the purpose and the process of lipogenesis

</div>
Fats (or triglycerides) within the body are ingested as food or
synthesized by adipocytes or hepatocytes from carbohydrate precursors
([\[link\]](#fig-ch25_03_01){: .autogenerated-content}). Lipid
metabolism entails the oxidation of fatty acids to either generate
energy or synthesize new lipids from smaller constituent molecules.
Lipid metabolism is associated with carbohydrate metabolism, as products
of glucose (such as acetyl CoA) can be converted into lipids.
{: #fs-id1507366}

<figure id="fig-ch25_03_01">
<div data-type="title">
Triglyceride Broken Down into a Monoglyceride
</div>
<figcaption>
A triglyceride molecule (a) breaks down into a monoglyceride (b).
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1863711" data-alt="The top image shows
the chemical formula for a triglyceride, and the bottom panel shows the
formula for a monoglyceride."> ![The top image shows the chemical
formula for a triglyceride, and the bottom panel shows the formula for a
monoglyceride.](<../resources/2511_A_Triglyceride_Molecule_(a)_Is_Broken_Down_Into_Monoglycerides_(b).jpg>){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="450"} </span>
</figure>
Lipid metabolism begins in the intestine where ingested <span
data-type="term">triglycerides</span> are broken down into smaller chain
fatty acids and subsequently into <span data-type="term">monoglyceride
molecules</span> (see [\[link\]](#fig-ch25_03_01){:
.autogenerated-content}**b**{: data-effect="bold"}) by <span
data-type="term">pancreatic lipases</span>, enzymes that break down fats
after they are emulsified by <span data-type="term">bile salts</span>.
When food reaches the small intestine in the form of chyme, a digestive
hormone called <span data-type="term">cholecystokinin (CCK)</span> is
released by intestinal cells in the intestinal mucosa. CCK stimulates
the release of pancreatic lipase from the pancreas and stimulates the
contraction of the gallbladder to release stored bile salts into the
intestine. CCK also travels to the brain, where it can act as a hunger
suppressant.
{: #fs-id2706435}

Together, the pancreatic lipases and bile salts break down triglycerides
into free fatty acids. These fatty acids can be transported across the
intestinal membrane. However, once they cross the membrane, they are
recombined to again form triglyceride molecules. Within the intestinal
cells, these triglycerides are packaged along with cholesterol molecules
in phospholipid vesicles called <span
data-type="term">chylomicrons</span> ([\[link\]](#fig-ch25_03_02){:
.autogenerated-content}). The chylomicrons enable fats and cholesterol
to move within the aqueous environment of your lymphatic and circulatory
systems. Chylomicrons leave the enterocytes by exocytosis and enter the
lymphatic system via lacteals in the villi of the intestine. From the
lymphatic system, the chylomicrons are transported to the circulatory
system. Once in the circulation, they can either go to the liver or be
stored in fat cells (adipocytes) that comprise adipose (fat) tissue
found throughout the body.
{: #fs-id1495971}

<figure id="fig-ch25_03_02">
<div data-type="title">
Chylomicrons
</div>
<figcaption>
Chylomicrons contain triglycerides, cholesterol molecules, and other
apolipoproteins (protein molecules). They function to carry these
water-insoluble molecules from the intestine, through the lymphatic
system, and into the bloodstream, which carries the lipids to adipose
tissue for storage.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1845052" data-alt="This figure shows a
chylomicron containing triglycerides and cholesterol molecules as well
as other lipids."> ![This figure shows a chylomicron containing
triglycerides and cholesterol molecules as well as other
lipids.](../resources/2512_Chylomicrons_Contain_Triglycerides_Cholesterol_Molecules_and_Other_Lipids.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="380"} </span>
</figure>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2181973" markdown="1">
# Lipolysis
{: data-type="title"}

To obtain energy from fat, triglycerides must first be broken down by
hydrolysis into their two principal components, fatty acids and
glycerol. This process, called <span data-type="term">lipolysis</span>,
takes place in the cytoplasm. The resulting fatty acids are oxidized by
β-oxidation into acetyl CoA, which is used by the Krebs cycle. The
glycerol that is released from triglycerides after lipolysis directly
enters the glycolysis pathway as DHAP. Because one triglyceride molecule
yields three fatty acid molecules with as much as 16 or more carbons in
each one, fat molecules yield more energy than carbohydrates and are an
important source of energy for the human body. Triglycerides yield more
than twice the energy per unit mass when compared to carbohydrates and
proteins. Therefore, when glucose levels are low, triglycerides can be
converted into acetyl CoA molecules and used to generate ATP through
aerobic respiration.
{: #fs-id2553561}

The breakdown of fatty acids, called <span data-type="term">fatty acid
oxidation</span> or <span data-type="term">beta (β)-oxidation</span>,
begins in the cytoplasm, where fatty acids are converted into fatty acyl
CoA molecules. This fatty acyl CoA combines with carnitine to create a
fatty acyl carnitine molecule, which helps to transport the fatty acid
across the mitochondrial membrane. Once inside the mitochondrial matrix,
the fatty acyl carnitine molecule is converted back into fatty acyl CoA
and then into acetyl CoA ([\[link\]](#fig-ch25_03_03){:
.autogenerated-content}). The newly formed acetyl CoA enters the Krebs
cycle and is used to produce ATP in the same way as acetyl CoA derived
from pyruvate.
{: #fs-id1530462}

<figure id="fig-ch25_03_03">
<div data-type="title">
Breakdown of Fatty Acids
</div>
<figcaption>
During fatty acid oxidation, triglycerides can be broken down into
acetyl CoA molecules and used for energy when glucose levels are low.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2474769" data-alt="This figure shows
the reactions that break down fatty acids. The top panel shows the
conversion of fatty acids into carnitine. The bottom panel shows the
conversion of carnitine into acetyl-CoA."> ![This figure shows the
reactions that break down fatty acids. The top panel shows the
conversion of fatty acids into carnitine. The bottom panel shows the
conversion of carnitine into
acetyl-CoA.](../resources/2513_The_Breakdown_of_Fatty_Acids.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="500"} </span>
</figure>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2487615" markdown="1">
# Ketogenesis
{: data-type="title"}

If excessive acetyl CoA is created from the oxidation of fatty acids and
the Krebs cycle is overloaded and cannot handle it, the acetyl CoA is
diverted to create <span data-type="term">ketone bodies</span>. These
ketone bodies can serve as a fuel source if glucose levels are too low
in the body. Ketones serve as fuel in times of prolonged starvation or
when patients suffer from uncontrolled diabetes and cannot utilize most
of the circulating glucose. In both cases, fat stores are liberated to
generate energy through the Krebs cycle and will generate ketone bodies
when too much acetyl CoA accumulates.
{: #fs-id2124252}

In this ketone synthesis reaction, excess acetyl CoA is converted into
<span data-type="term">hydroxymethylglutaryl CoA (HMG CoA)</span>. HMG
CoA is a precursor of cholesterol and is an intermediate that is
subsequently converted into β-hydroxybutyrate, the primary ketone body
in the blood ([\[link\]](#fig-ch25_03_04){: .autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id1539903}

<figure id="fig-ch25_03_04">
<div data-type="title">
Ketogenesis
</div>
<figcaption>
Excess acetyl CoA is diverted from the Krebs cycle to the ketogenesis
pathway. This reaction occurs in the mitochondria of liver cells. The
result is the production of β-hydroxybutyrate, the primary ketone body
found in the blood.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1396026" data-alt="This pathway shows
the production of beta-hydroxybutyrate from acetyl-CoA."> ![This pathway
shows the production of beta-hydroxybutyrate from
acetyl-CoA.](../resources/2514_Ketogenesis.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="580"} </span>
</figure>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1815892" markdown="1">
# Ketone Body Oxidation
{: data-type="title"}

Organs that have classically been thought to be dependent solely on
glucose, such as the brain, can actually use ketones as an alternative
energy source. This keeps the brain functioning when glucose is limited.
When ketones are produced faster than they can be used, they can be
broken down into CO<sub>2</sub> and acetone. The acetone is removed by
exhalation. One symptom of ketogenesis is that the patient’s breath
smells sweet like alcohol. This effect provides one way of telling if a
diabetic is properly controlling the disease. The carbon dioxide
produced can acidify the blood, leading to diabetic ketoacidosis, a
dangerous condition in diabetics.
{: #fs-id2459241}

Ketones oxidize to produce energy for the brain. <span
data-type="term">beta (β)-hydroxybutyrate</span> is oxidized to
acetoacetate and NADH is released. An HS-CoA molecule is added to
acetoacetate, forming acetoacetyl CoA. The carbon within the acetoacetyl
CoA that is not bonded to the CoA then detaches, splitting the molecule
in two. This carbon then attaches to another free HS-CoA, resulting in
two acetyl CoA molecules. These two acetyl CoA molecules are then
processed through the Krebs cycle to generate energy
([\[link\]](#fig-ch25_03_05){: .autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id2383123}

<figure id="fig-ch25_03_05">
<div data-type="title">
Ketone Oxidation
</div>
<figcaption>
When glucose is limited, ketone bodies can be oxidized to produce acetyl
CoA to be used in the Krebs cycle to generate energy.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2925057" data-alt="This figure shows
the reactions in which ketone is oxidized to acetyl-CoA."> ![This figure
shows the reactions in which ketone is oxidized to
acetyl-CoA.](../resources/2515_Ketone_Oxidation.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="520"} </span>
</figure>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1729674" markdown="1">
# Lipogenesis
{: data-type="title"}

When glucose levels are plentiful, the excess acetyl CoA generated by
glycolysis can be converted into fatty acids, triglycerides,
cholesterol, steroids, and bile salts. This process, called <span
data-type="term">lipogenesis</span>, creates lipids (fat) from the
acetyl CoA and takes place in the cytoplasm of adipocytes (fat cells)
and hepatocytes (liver cells). When you eat more glucose or
carbohydrates than your body needs, your system uses acetyl CoA to turn
the excess into fat. Although there are several metabolic sources of
acetyl CoA, it is most commonly derived from glycolysis. Acetyl CoA
availability is significant, because it initiates lipogenesis.
Lipogenesis begins with acetyl CoA and advances by the subsequent
addition of two carbon atoms from another acetyl CoA; this process is
repeated until fatty acids are the appropriate length. Because this is a
bond-creating anabolic process, ATP is consumed. However, the creation
of triglycerides and lipids is an efficient way of storing the energy
available in carbohydrates. Triglycerides and lipids, high-energy
molecules, are stored in adipose tissue until they are needed.
{: #fs-id1352492}

Although lipogenesis occurs in the cytoplasm, the necessary acetyl CoA
is created in the mitochondria and cannot be transported across the
mitochondrial membrane. To solve this problem, pyruvate is converted
into both oxaloacetate and acetyl CoA. Two different enzymes are
required for these conversions. Oxaloacetate forms via the action of
pyruvate carboxylase, whereas the action of pyruvate dehydrogenase
creates acetyl CoA. Oxaloacetate and acetyl CoA combine to form citrate,
which can cross the mitochondrial membrane and enter the cytoplasm. In
the cytoplasm, citrate is converted back into oxaloacetate and acetyl
CoA. Oxaloacetate is converted into malate and then into pyruvate.
Pyruvate crosses back across the mitochondrial membrane to wait for the
next cycle of lipogenesis. The acetyl CoA is converted into malonyl CoA
that is used to synthesize fatty acids. [\[link\]](#fig-ch25_03_06){:
.autogenerated-content} summarizes the pathways of lipid metabolism.
{: #fs-id1530964}

<figure id="fig-ch25_03_06">
<div data-type="title">
Lipid Metabolism
</div>
<figcaption>
Lipids may follow one of several pathways during metabolism. Glycerol
and fatty acids follow different pathways.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2892830" data-alt="This figure shows
the different reactions that take place for lipid metabolism."> ![This
figure shows the different reactions that take place for lipid
metabolism.](../resources/2516_Lipid_Metabolism.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="550"} </span>
</figure>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2179452" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

Lipids are available to the body from three sources. They can be
ingested in the diet, stored in the adipose tissue of the body, or
synthesized in the liver. Fats ingested in the diet are digested in the
small intestine. The triglycerides are broken down into monoglycerides
and free fatty acids, then imported across the intestinal mucosa. Once
across, the triglycerides are resynthesized and transported to the liver
or adipose tissue. Fatty acids are oxidized through fatty acid or
β-oxidation into two-carbon acetyl CoA molecules, which can then enter
the Krebs cycle to generate ATP. If excess acetyl CoA is created and
overloads the capacity of the Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA can be used to
synthesize ketone bodies. When glucose is limited, ketone bodies can be
oxidized and used for fuel. Excess acetyl CoA generated from excess
glucose or carbohydrate ingestion can be used for fatty acid synthesis
or lipogenesis. Acetyl CoA is used to create lipids, triglycerides,
steroid hormones, cholesterol, and bile salts. Lipolysis is the
breakdown of triglycerides into glycerol and fatty acids, making them
easier for the body to process.
{: #fs-id3048997}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1988973" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1548558">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2194386" markdown="1">
Lipids in the diet can be ________.
{: #fs-id2364998}

1.  broken down into energy for the body
2.  stored as triglycerides for later use
3.  converted into acetyl CoA
4.  all of the above
{: #fs-id2151308 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1747827" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id2180372}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id918427">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2624937" markdown="1">
The gallbladder provides ________ that aid(s) in transport of lipids
across the intestinal membrane.
{: #fs-id1278163}

1.  lipases
2.  cholesterol
3.  proteins
4.  bile salts
{: #fs-id1351052 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1369790" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id2698263}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1468981">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2058880" markdown="1">
Triglycerides are transported by chylomicrons because ________.
{: #fs-id1608945}

1.  they cannot move easily in the blood stream because they are fat
    based, while the blood is water based
2.  they are too small to move by themselves
3.  the chylomicrons contain enzymes they need for anabolism
4.  they cannot fit across the intestinal membrane
{: #fs-id1987199 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1259872" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id3004370}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1750106">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1445913" markdown="1">
Which molecule produces the most ATP?
{: #fs-id1932115}

1.  carbohydrates
2.  FADH<sub>2</sub>
3.  triglycerides
4.  NADH
{: #fs-id1024152 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2190561" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id1302288}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2158787">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1010938" markdown="1">
Which molecules can enter the Krebs cycle?
{: #fs-id1534071}

1.  chylomicrons
2.  acetyl CoA
3.  monoglycerides
4.  ketone bodies
{: #fs-id1813717 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1326883" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id2469756}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1297521">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2163595" markdown="1">
Acetyl CoA can be converted to all of the following except ________.
{: #fs-id1422090}

1.  ketone bodies
2.  fatty acids
3.  polysaccharides
4.  triglycerides
{: #fs-id2151395 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1351734" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id2796738}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2116009" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2124307">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1996936" markdown="1">
Discuss how carbohydrates can be stored as fat.
{: #fs-id2477190}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id3304696" data-label="" markdown="1">
Carbohydrates are converted into pyruvate during glycolysis. This
pyruvate is converted into acetyl CoA and proceeds through the Krebs
cycle. When excess acetyl CoA is produced that cannot be processed
through the Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA is converted into triglycerides
and fatty acids to be stored in the liver and adipose tissue.
{: #fs-id2902667}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2936242">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1362126" markdown="1">
If a diabetic’s breath smells like alcohol, what could this mean?
{: #fs-id2637766}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id799310" data-label="" markdown="1">
If diabetes is uncontrolled, the glucose in the blood is not being taken
up and processed by the cells. Although blood glucose levels are high,
there is no glucose available to the cells to be converted into energy.
Because glucose is lacking, the body turns to other energy sources,
including ketones. A side effect of using ketones as fuel is a sweet
alcohol smell on the breath.
{: #fs-id1499660}

</div>
</div>
</section>



