---
title: Regulation of Fluid Volume and Composition
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Explain the mechanism of action of diuretics
* Explain why the differential permeability or impermeability of
  specific sections of the nephron tubules is necessary for urine
  formation

</div>
The major hormones influencing total body water are ADH, aldosterone,
and ANH. Circumstances that lead to fluid depletion in the body include
blood loss and dehydration. Homeostasis requires that volume and
osmolarity be preserved. Blood volume is important in maintaining
sufficient blood pressure, and there are nonrenal mechanisms involved in
its preservation, including vasoconstriction, which can act within
seconds of a drop in pressure. Thirst mechanisms are also activated to
promote the consumption of water lost through respiration, evaporation,
or urination. Hormonal mechanisms are activated to recover volume while
maintaining a normal osmotic environment. These mechanisms act
principally on the kidney.
{: #fs-id2759289}

<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2641638" markdown="1">
# Volume-sensing Mechanisms
{: data-type="title"}

The body cannot directly measure blood volume, but blood pressure can be
measured. Blood pressure often reflects blood volume and is measured by
baroreceptors in the aorta and carotid sinuses. When blood pressure
increases, baroreceptors send more frequent action potentials to the
central nervous system, leading to widespread vasodilation. Included in
this vasodilation are the afferent arterioles supplying the glomerulus,
resulting in increased GFR, and water loss by the kidneys. If pressure
decreases, fewer action potentials travel to the central nervous system,
resulting in more sympathetic stimulation-producing vasoconstriction,
which will result in decreased filtration and GFR, and water loss.
{: #fs-id2060207}

Decreased blood pressure is also sensed by the granular cells in the
afferent arteriole of the JGA. In response, the enzyme renin is
released. You saw earlier in the chapter that renin activity leads to an
almost immediate rise in blood pressure as activated angiotensin II
produces vasoconstriction. The rise in pressure is sustained by the
aldosterone effects initiated by angiotensin II; this includes an
increase in Na<sup>+</sup> retention and water volume. As an aside, late
in the menstrual cycle, progesterone has a modest influence on water
retention. Due to its structural similarity to aldosterone, progesterone
binds to the aldosterone receptor in the collecting duct of the kidney,
causing the same, albeit weaker, effect on Na<sup>+</sup> and water
retention.
{: #fs-id1963376}

Cardiomyocytes of the atria also respond to greater stretch (as blood
pressure rises) by secreting ANH. ANH opposes the action of aldosterone
by inhibiting the recovery of Na<sup>+</sup> by the DCT and collecting
ducts. More Na<sup>+</sup> is lost, and as water follows, total blood
volume and pressure decline. In low-pressure states, ANH does not seem
to have much effect.
{: #fs-id2105084}

ADH is also called vasopressin. Early researchers found that in cases of
unusually high secretion of ADH, the hormone caused vasoconstriction
(vasopressor activity, hence the name). Only later were its antidiuretic
properties identified. Synthetic ADH is still used occasionally to stem
life-threatening esophagus bleeding in alcoholics.
{: #fs-id2636907}

When blood volume drops 5–10 percent, causing a decrease in blood
pressure, there is a rapid and significant increase in ADH release from
the posterior pituitary. Immediate vasoconstriction to increase blood
pressure is the result. ADH also causes activation of aquaporin channels
in the collecting ducts to affect the recovery of water to help restore
vascular volume.
{: #fs-id2236810}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2298462" markdown="1">
# Diuretics and Fluid Volume
{: data-type="title"}

A <span data-type="term">diuretic</span> is a compound that increases
urine volume. Three familiar drinks contain diuretic compounds: coffee,
tea, and alcohol. The caffeine in coffee and tea works by promoting
vasodilation in the nephron, which increases GFR. Alcohol increases GFR
by inhibiting ADH release from the posterior pituitary, resulting in
less water recovery by the collecting duct. In cases of high blood
pressure, diuretics may be prescribed to reduce blood volume and,
thereby, reduce blood pressure. The most frequently prescribed
anti-hypertensive diuretic is hydrochlorothiazide. It inhibits the
Na<sup>+</sup>/ Cl<sup>– </sup>symporter in the DCT and collecting duct.
The result is a loss of Na<sup>+</sup> with water following passively by
osmosis.
{: #fs-id2396821}

Osmotic diuretics promote water loss by osmosis. An example is the
indigestible sugar mannitol, which is most often administered to reduce
brain swelling after head injury. However, it is not the only sugar that
can produce a diuretic effect. In cases of poorly controlled diabetes
mellitus, glucose levels exceed the capacity of the tubular glucose
symporters, resulting in glucose in the urine. The unrecovered glucose
becomes a powerful osmotic diuretic. Classically, in the days before
glucose could be detected in the blood and urine, clinicians identified
diabetes mellitus by the three Ps: polyuria (diuresis), polydipsia
(increased thirst), and polyphagia (increased hunger).
{: #fs-id2433958}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2267360" markdown="1">
# Regulation of Extracellular Na<sup>+</sup>
{: data-type="title"}

Sodium has a very strong osmotic effect and attracts water. It plays a
larger role in the osmolarity of the plasma than any other circulating
component of the blood. If there is too much Na<sup>+</sup> present,
either due to poor control or excess dietary consumption, a series of
metabolic problems ensue. There is an increase in total volume of water,
which leads to hypertension (high blood pressure). Over a long period,
this increases the risk of serious complications such as heart attacks,
strokes, and aneurysms. It can also contribute to system-wide edema
(swelling).
{: #fs-id2140392}

Mechanisms for regulating Na<sup>+</sup> concentration include the
renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system and ADH (see
[\[link\]](/m46431#fig-ch26_04_04){: .autogenerated-content}).
Aldosterone stimulates the uptake of Na<sup>+</sup> on the apical cell
membrane of cells in the DCT and collecting ducts, whereas ADH helps to
regulate Na<sup>+</sup> concentration indirectly by regulating the
reabsorption of water.
{: #fs-id2068778}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1407497" markdown="1">
# Regulation of Extracellular K<sup>+</sup>
{: data-type="title"}

Potassium is present in a 30-fold greater concentration inside the cell
than outside the cell. A generalization can be made that K<sup>+</sup>
and Na<sup>+</sup> concentrations will move in opposite directions. When
more Na<sup>+</sup> is reabsorbed, more K<sup>+</sup> is secreted; when
less Na<sup>+</sup> is reabsorbed (leading to excretion by the kidney),
more K<sup>+</sup> is retained. When aldosterone causes a recovery of
Na<sup>+</sup> in the nephron, a negative electrical gradient is created
that promotes the secretion of K<sup>+</sup> and Cl<sup>– </sup>into the
lumen.
{: #fs-id2754247}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1942087" markdown="1">
# Regulation of Cl<sup>–</sup>
{: data-type="title"}

Chloride is important in acid–base balance in the extracellular space
and has other functions, such as in the stomach, where it combines with
hydrogen ions in the stomach lumen to form hydrochloric acid, aiding
digestion. Its close association with Na<sup>+</sup> in the
extracellular environment makes it the dominant anion of this
compartment, and its regulation closely mirrors that of Na<sup>+</sup>.
{: #fs-id1322533}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1413567" markdown="1">
# Regulation of Ca<sup>++</sup> and Phosphate
{: data-type="title"}

The parathyroid glands monitor and respond to circulating levels of
Ca<sup>++</sup> in the blood. When levels drop too low, PTH is released
to stimulate the DCT to reabsorb Ca<sup>++ </sup>from the forming urine.
When levels are adequate or high, less PTH is released and more
Ca<sup>++</sup> remains in the forming urine to be lost. Phosphate
levels move in the opposite direction. When Ca<sup>++</sup> levels are
low, PTH inhibits reabsorption of <math
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="left"> <semantics>
<mrow> <msubsup> <mrow> <mtext>HPO</mtext> </mrow> <mn>4</mn> <mrow>
<mn>2</mn><mo>−</mo> </mrow> </msubsup> </mrow> <annotation
encoding="MathType-MTEF">MathType@MTEF@5@5@+=feaagyart1ev2aaatCvAUfeBSjuyZL2yd9gzLbvyNv2CaerbuLwBLnhiov2DGi1BTfMBaeXatLxBI9gBaerbd9wDYLwzYbItLDharqqtubsr4rNCHbGeaGqiVu0Je9sqqrpepC0xbbL8F4rqqrFfpeea0xe9Lq=Jc9vqaqpepm0xbba9pwe9Q8fs0=yqaqpepae9pg0FirpepeKkFr0xfr=xfr=xb9adbaqaaeGaciGaaiaabeqaamaabaabaaGcbaGaaeisaiaabcfacaqGpbWaa0baaSqaaiaaisdaaeaacaaIYaGaeyOeI0caaaaa@3AF7@</annotation>
</semantics> </math>

 so that its blood level drops, allowing Ca<sup>++</sup> levels to rise.
PTH also stimulates the renal conversion of calcidiol into calcitriol,
the active form of vitamin D. Calcitriol then stimulates the intestines
to absorb more Ca<sup>++</sup> from the diet.
{: #fs-id2111766}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2492957" markdown="1">
# Regulation of H<sup>+</sup>, Bicarbonate, and pH
{: data-type="title"}

The acid–base homeostasis of the body is a function of chemical buffers
and physiologic buffering provided by the lungs and kidneys. Buffers,
especially proteins, <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"
display="left"> <semantics> <mrow> <msubsup> <mrow> <mtext>HCO</mtext>
</mrow> <mn>3</mn> <mrow> <mn>2</mn><mo>−</mo> </mrow> </msubsup>
</mrow> <annotation
encoding="MathType-MTEF">MathType@MTEF@5@5@+=feaagyart1ev2aaatCvAUfeBSjuyZL2yd9gzLbvyNv2CaerbuLwBLnhiov2DGi1BTfMBaeXatLxBI9gBaerbd9wDYLwzYbItLDharqqtubsr4rNCHbGeaGqiVu0Je9sqqrpepC0xbbL8F4rqqrFfpeea0xe9Lq=Jc9vqaqpepm0xbba9pwe9Q8fs0=yqaqpepae9pg0FirpepeKkFr0xfr=xfr=xb9adbaqaaeGaciGaaiaabeqaamaabaabaaGcbaGaaeisaiaaboeacaqGpbWaa0baaSqaaiaaiodaaeaacaaIYaGaeyOeI0caaaaa@3AE9@</annotation>
</semantics> </math>

, and ammonia have a very large capacity to absorb or release
H<sup>+</sup> as needed to resist a change in pH. They can act within
fractions of a second. The lungs can rid the body of excess acid very
rapidly (seconds to minutes) through the conversion of
HCO<sub>3</sub><sup>–</sup> into CO<sub>2</sub>, which is then exhaled.
It is rapid but has limited capacity in the face of a significant acid
challenge. The kidneys can rid the body of both acid and base. The renal
capacity is large but slow (minutes to hours). The cells of the PCT
actively secrete H<sup>+</sup> into the forming urine as Na<sup>+</sup>
is reabsorbed. The body rids itself of excess H<sup>+</sup> and raises
blood pH. In the collecting ducts, the apical surfaces of intercalated
cells have proton pumps that actively secrete H<sup>+</sup> into the
luminal, forming urine to remove it from the body.
{: #fs-id2016656}

As hydrogen ions are pumped into the forming urine, it is buffered by
bicarbonate (HCO<sub>3</sub><sup>–</sup>),
H<sub>2</sub>PO<sub>4</sub><sup>– </sup>(dihydrogen phosphate ion), or
ammonia (forming NH<sub>4</sub><sup>+</sup>, ammonium ion). Urine pH
typically varies in a normal range from 4.5 to 8.0.
{: #fs-id2267433}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1700104" markdown="1">
# Regulation of Nitrogen Wastes
{: data-type="title"}

Nitrogen wastes are produced by the breakdown of proteins during normal
metabolism. Proteins are broken down into amino acids, which in turn are
deaminated by having their nitrogen groups removed. Deamination converts
the amino (NH<sub>2</sub>) groups into ammonia (NH<sub>3</sub>),
ammonium ion (NH<sub>4</sub><sup>+</sup>), urea, or uric acid
([\[link\]](#fig-ch26_09_01){: .autogenerated-content}). Ammonia is
extremely toxic, so most of it is very rapidly converted into urea in
the liver. Human urinary wastes typically contain primarily urea with
small amounts of ammonium and very little uric acid.
{: #fs-id2327998}

<figure id="fig-ch26_09_01">
<div data-type="title">
Nitrogen Wastes
</div>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2788562" data-alt="This figure shows
the chemical structure of ammonia, urea, and uric acid."> ![This figure
shows the chemical structure of ammonia, urea, and uric
acid.](../resources/2627_Nitrogen_Wastes.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="530"} </span>
</figure>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2201611" markdown="1">
# Elimination of Drugs and Hormones
{: data-type="title"}

Water-soluble drugs may be excreted in the urine and are influenced by
one or all of the following processes: glomerular filtration, tubular
secretion, or tubular reabsorption. Drugs that are structurally small
can be filtered by the glomerulus with the filtrate. Large drug
molecules such as heparin or those that are bound to plasma proteins
cannot be filtered and are not readily eliminated. Some drugs can be
eliminated by carrier proteins that enable secretion of the drug into
the tubule lumen. There are specific carriers that eliminate basic (such
as dopamine or histamine) or acidic drugs (such as penicillin or
indomethacin). As is the case with other substances, drugs may be both
filtered and reabsorbed passively along a concentration gradient.
{: #fs-id1587986}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1617311" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

The major hormones regulating body fluids are ADH, aldosterone and ANH.
Progesterone is similar in structure to aldosterone and can bind to and
weakly stimulate aldosterone receptors, providing a similar but
diminished response. Blood pressure is a reflection of blood volume and
is monitored by baroreceptors in the aortic arch and carotid sinuses.
When blood pressure increases, more action potentials are sent to the
central nervous system, resulting in greater vasodilation, greater GFR,
and more water lost in the urine. ANH is released by the cardiomyocytes
when blood pressure increases, causing Na<sup>+</sup> and water loss.
ADH at high levels causes vasoconstriction in addition to its action on
the collecting ducts to recover more water. Diuretics increase urine
volume. Mechanisms for controlling Na<sup>+</sup> concentration in the
blood include the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system and ADH. When
Na<sup>+</sup> is retained, K<sup>+</sup> is excreted; when
Na<sup>+</sup> is lost, K<sup>+</sup> is retained. When circulating
Ca<sup>++</sup> decreases, PTH stimulates the reabsorption of
Ca<sup>++</sup> and inhibits reabsorption of <math
xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="left"> <semantics>
<mrow> <msubsup> <mrow> <mtext>HPO</mtext> </mrow> <mn>4</mn> <mrow>
<mn>2</mn><mo>−</mo> </mrow> </msubsup> </mrow> <annotation
encoding="MathType-MTEF">MathType@MTEF@5@5@+=feaagyart1ev2aaatCvAUfeBSjuyZL2yd9gzLbvyNv2CaerbuLwBLnhiov2DGi1BTfMBaeXatLxBI9gBaerbd9wDYLwzYbItLDharqqtubsr4rNCHbGeaGqiVu0Je9sqqrpepC0xbbL8F4rqqrFfpeea0xe9Lq=Jc9vqaqpepm0xbba9pwe9Q8fs0=yqaqpepae9pg0FirpepeKkFr0xfr=xfr=xb9adbaqaaeGaciGaaiaabeqaamaabaabaaGcbaGaaeisaiaabcfacaqGpbWaa0baaSqaaiaaisdaaeaacaaIYaGaeyOeI0caaaaa@3AF7@</annotation>
</semantics> </math>

. pH is regulated through buffers, expiration of CO<sub>2</sub>, and
excretion of acid or base by the kidneys. The breakdown of amino acids
produces ammonia. Most ammonia is converted into less-toxic urea in the
liver and excreted in the urine. Regulation of drugs is by glomerular
filtration, tubular secretion, and tubular reabsorption.
{: #fs-id2471150}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2299792" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2576304">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2286049" markdown="1">
Which of these beverages does *not*{: data-effect="italics"} have a
diuretic effect?
{: #fs-id1701774}

1.  tea
2.  coffee
3.  alcohol
4.  milk
{: #fs-id2072730 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1968351" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id2633869}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2272155">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2679107" markdown="1">
Progesterone can bind to receptors for which hormone that, when
released, activates water retention?
{: #fs-id2679108}

1.  aldosterone
2.  ADH
3.  PTH
4.  ANH
{: #fs-id2788338 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2337842" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id1253815}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2302736">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2766706" markdown="1">
Renin is released in response to ________.
{: #fs-id1849253}

1.  increased blood pressure
2.  decreased blood pressure
3.  ACE
4.  diuretics
{: #fs-id2571061 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2416547" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id2574002}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2157884" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2093721">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1618245" markdown="1">
Why is ADH also called vasopressin?
{: #fs-id1328581}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2289250" data-label="" markdown="1">
When first discovered, it was named for its known
activity—vasoconstriction.
{: #fs-id2596773}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2567863">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2006585" markdown="1">
How can glucose be a diuretic?
{: #fs-id2310617}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2757946" data-label="" markdown="1">
In cases of diabetes mellitus, there is more glucose present than the
kidney can recover and the excess glucose is lost in the urine. It
possesses osmotic character so that it attracts water to the forming
urine.
{: #fs-id2352190}

</div>
</div>
</section>



