---
title: Muscles of the Pectoral Girdle and Upper Limbs
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Identify the muscles of the pectoral girdle and upper limbs
* Identify the movement and function of the pectoral girdle and upper
  limbs

</div>
Muscles of the shoulder and upper limb can be divided into four groups:
muscles that stabilize and position the pectoral girdle, muscles that
move the arm, muscles that move the forearm, and muscles that move the
wrists, hands, and fingers. The <span data-type="term">pectoral
girdle</span>, or shoulder girdle, consists of the lateral ends of the
clavicle and scapula, along with the proximal end of the humerus, and
the muscles covering these three bones to stabilize the shoulder joint.
The girdle creates a base from which the head of the humerus, in its
ball-and-socket joint with the glenoid fossa of the scapula, can move
the arm in multiple directions.
{: #fs-id1397217}

<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1865841" markdown="1">
# Muscles That Position the Pectoral Girdle
{: data-type="title"}

Muscles that position the pectoral girdle are located either on the
anterior thorax or on the posterior thorax
([\[link\]](#fig-ch11_05_01){: .autogenerated-content} and
[\[link\]](#tbl-ch11_08){: .autogenerated-content}). The anterior
muscles include the <span data-type="term">subclavius</span>, <span
data-type="term">pectoralis minor</span>, and <span
data-type="term">serratus anterior</span>. The posterior muscles include
the <span data-type="term">trapezius</span>, <span
data-type="term">rhomboid major</span>, and <span
data-type="term">rhomboid minor</span>. When the rhomboids are
contracted, your scapula moves medially, which can pull the shoulder and
upper limb posteriorly.
{: #fs-id2129930}

<figure id="fig-ch11_05_01">
<div data-type="title">
Muscles That Position the Pectoral Girdle
</div>
<figcaption>
The muscles that stabilize the pectoral girdle make it a steady base on
which other muscles can move the arm. Note that the pectoralis major and
deltoid, which move the humerus, are cut here to show the deeper
positioning muscles.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2134597" data-alt="The left panel shows
the anterior lateral view of the pectoral girdle muscle, and the right
panel shows the posterior view of the pectoral girdle muscle."> ![The
left panel shows the anterior lateral view of the pectoral girdle
muscle, and the right panel shows the posterior view of the pectoral
girdle
muscle.](../resources/1118_Muscles_that_Position_the_Pectoral_Girdle.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="540"} </span>
</figure>
<table id="tbl-ch11_08" summary=""><thead> <tr> <th colspan="7">Muscles that Position the Pectoral Girdle</th> </tr> <tr> <th>Position in the thorax</th> <th>Movement</th> <th>Target</th> <th>Target motion direction</th> <th>Prime mover</th> <th>Origin</th> <th>Insertion</th> </tr> </thead><tbody> <tr> <td>Anterior thorax</td> <td>Stabilizes clavicle during movement by depressing it</td> <td>Clavicle</td> <td>Depression</td> <td>Subclavius</td> <td>First rib</td> <td>Inferior surface of clavicle</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Anterior thorax</td> <td>Rotates shoulder anteriorly (throwing motion); assists with inhalation</td> <td>Scapula; ribs</td> <td>Scapula: depresses; ribs: elevates</td> <td>Pectoralis minor</td> <td>Anterior surfaces of certain ribs (2–4 or 3–5)</td> <td>Coracoid process of scapula</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Anterior thorax</td> <td>Moves arm from side of body to front of body; assists with inhalation</td> <td>Scapula; ribs</td> <td>Scapula: protracts; ribs: elevates</td> <td>Serratus anterior</td> <td>Muscle slips from certain ribs (1–8 or 1–9)</td> <td>Anterior surface of vertebral border of scapula</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Posterior thorax</td> <td>Elevates shoulders (shrugging); pulls shoulder blades together; tilts head backwards</td> <td>Scapula; cervical spine</td> <td>Scapula: rotests inferiorly, retracts, elevates, and depresses; spine: extends</td> <td>Trapezius</td> <td>Skull; vertebral column</td> <td>Acromion and spine of scapula; clavicle</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Posterior thorax</td> <td>Stabilizes scapula during pectoral girdle movement</td> <td>Scapula</td> <td>Retracts; rotates inferiorly</td> <td>Rhomboid major </td> <td>Thoracic vertebrae (T2–T5)</td> <td>Medial border of scapula</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Posterior thorax</td> <td>Stabilizes scapula during pectoral girdle movement</td> <td>Scapula</td> <td>Retracts; rotates inferiorly</td> <td>Rhomboid minor</td> <td>Cervical and thoracic vertebrae (C7 and T1)</td> <td>Medial border of scapula</td> </tr> </tbody></table>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2505955" markdown="1">
# Muscles That Move the Humerus
{: data-type="title"}

Similar to the muscles that position the pectoral girdle, muscles that
cross the shoulder joint and move the humerus bone of the arm include
both axial and scapular muscles ([\[link\]](#fig-ch11_05_02){:
.autogenerated-content} and [\[link\]](#fig-ch11_05_03){:
.autogenerated-content}). The two axial muscles are the pectoralis major
and the latissimus dorsi. The <span data-type="term">pectoralis
major</span> is thick and fan-shaped, covering much of the superior
portion of the anterior thorax. The broad, triangular <span
data-type="term">latissimus dorsi</span> is located on the inferior part
of the back, where it inserts into a thick connective tissue shealth
called an aponeurosis.
{: #fs-id2008704}

<figure id="fig-ch11_05_02">
<div data-type="title">
Muscles That Move the Humerus
</div>
<figcaption>
(a, c) The muscles that move the humerus anteriorly are generally
located on the anterior side of the body and originate from the sternum
(e.g., pectoralis major) or the anterior side of the scapula (e.g.,
subscapularis). (b) The muscles that move the humerus superiorly
generally originate from the superior surfaces of the scapula and/or the
clavicle (e.g., deltoids). The muscles that move the humerus inferiorly
generally originate from middle or lower back (e.g., latissiumus dorsi).
(d) The muscles that move the humerus posteriorly are generally located
on the posterior side of the body and insert into the scapula (e.g.,
infraspinatus).
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2789953" data-alt="The top left panel
shows the lateral view of the pectoral and back muscles. The top right
panel shows the posterior view of the right deltoid and the left back
muscle. The bottom left panel shows the anterior view of the deep
muscles of the left shoulder, and the bottom right panel shows the deep
muscles of the left shoulder."> ![The top left panel shows the lateral
view of the pectoral and back muscles. The top right panel shows the
posterior view of the right deltoid and the left back muscle. The bottom
left panel shows the anterior view of the deep muscles of the left
shoulder, and the bottom right panel shows the deep muscles of the left
shoulder.](../resources/1119_Muscles_that_Move_the_Humerus.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="520"} </span>
</figure>
<figure id="fig-ch11_05_03">
<div data-type="title">
Muscles That Move the Humerus
</div>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1234943" data-alt="This table describes
the muscles that move the humerus. The pectoralis major is an axial
muscle that brings the elbows together and moves the elbows up (as
during an uppercut punch). It originates in the clavicle, sternum,
cartilage of ribs 1 through 6 or 1 through 7, and the aponeurosis of the
external oblique muscle. The latissimus dorsi is an axial muscle that
moves the elbow back (as in elbowing someone standing behind you) or
spreads the elbows apart. It originates in the thoracic vertebrae (T7
through T12), the lower vertebrae, ribs 9 through 12, and the iliac
crest. The deltoid is a scapular muscle that lifts arms at the shoulder.
It originates in the trapezius, clavicle, acromion, and spine of
scapula. The subscapularis is a scapular muscle that assists the
pectoralis major in bringing the elbows together and stabilizes the
shoulder joint during movement of the pectoral girdle. It originates in
the subscapular fossa of the scapula. The supraspinatus is a scapular
muscle that rotates the elbow outwards, as during a tennis swing. It
originates in the supraspinous fossa of the scapula. The infraspinatus
is a scapular muscle that rotates the elbow outwards, as during a tennis
swing. It originates in the infraspinous fossa of the scapula. The teres
major is a scapular muscle that assists the infraspinatus in rotating
the elbow outwards. It originates in the posterior surface of the
scapula. The teres minor is a scapular muscle that assists the
infraspinatus in rotating the elbow outwards. It originates in the
lateral border of the dorsal scapular surface. The coracobra chialis is
a scapular muscle that moves the elbow up and across the body, as when
putting a hand on the chest. It originates in the coracoid process of
the scapula."> ![This table describes the muscles that move the humerus.
The pectoralis major is an axial muscle that brings the elbows together
and moves the elbows up (as during an uppercut punch). It originates in
the clavicle, sternum, cartilage of ribs 1 through 6 or 1 through 7, and
the aponeurosis of the external oblique muscle. The latissimus dorsi is
an axial muscle that moves the elbow back (as in elbowing someone
standing behind you) or spreads the elbows apart. It originates in the
thoracic vertebrae (T7 through T12), the lower vertebrae, ribs 9 through
12, and the iliac crest. The deltoid is a scapular muscle that lifts
arms at the shoulder. It originates in the trapezius, clavicle,
acromion, and spine of scapula. The subscapularis is a scapular muscle
that assists the pectoralis major in bringing the elbows together and
stabilizes the shoulder joint during movement of the pectoral girdle. It
originates in the subscapular fossa of the scapula. The supraspinatus is
a scapular muscle that rotates the elbow outwards, as during a tennis
swing. It originates in the supraspinous fossa of the scapula. The
infraspinatus is a scapular muscle that rotates the elbow outwards, as
during a tennis swing. It originates in the infraspinous fossa of the
scapula. The teres major is a scapular muscle that assists the
infraspinatus in rotating the elbow outwards. It originates in the
posterior surface of the scapula. The teres minor is a scapular muscle
that assists the infraspinatus in rotating the elbow outwards. It
originates in the lateral border of the dorsal scapular surface. The
coracobra chialis is a scapular muscle that moves the elbow up and
across the body, as when putting a hand on the chest. It originates in
the coracoid process of the
scapula.](../resources/1129_Muscles_that_Moves_the_Humerus.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="520"} </span>
</figure>
The rest of the shoulder muscles originate on the scapula. The
anatomical and ligamental structure of the shoulder joint and the
arrangements of the muscles covering it, allows the arm to carry out
different types of movements. The <span data-type="term">deltoid</span>,
the thick muscle that creates the rounded lines of the shoulder is the
major abductor of the arm, but it also facilitates flexing and medial
rotation, as well as extension and lateral rotation. The <span
data-type="term">subscapularis</span> originates on the anterior scapula
and medially rotates the arm. Named for their locations, the <span
data-type="term">supraspinatus</span> (superior to the spine of the
scapula) and the <span data-type="term">infraspinatus</span> (inferior
to the spine of the scapula) abduct the arm, and laterally rotate the
arm, respectively. The thick and flat <span data-type="term">teres
major</span> is inferior to the teres minor and extends the arm, and
assists in adduction and medial rotation of it. The long <span
data-type="term">teres minor</span> laterally rotates and extends the
arm. Finally, the <span data-type="term">coracobrachialis</span> flexes
and adducts the arm.
{: #fs-id2501482}

The tendons of the deep subscapularis, supraspinatus, infraspinatus, and
teres minor connect the scapula to the humerus, forming the <span
data-type="term">rotator cuff</span> (musculotendinous cuff), the circle
of tendons around the shoulder joint. When baseball pitchers undergo
shoulder surgery it is usually on the rotator cuff, which becomes
pinched and inflamed, and may tear away from the bone due to the
repetitive motion of bring the arm overhead to throw a fast pitch.
{: #fs-id2421860}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2716122" markdown="1">
# Muscles That Move the Forearm
{: data-type="title"}

The forearm, made of the radius and ulna bones, has four main types of
action at the hinge of the elbow joint: flexion, extension, pronation,
and supination. The forearm flexors include the biceps brachii,
brachialis, and brachioradialis. The extensors are the <span
data-type="term">triceps brachii</span> and <span
data-type="term">anconeus</span>. The pronators are the <span
data-type="term">pronator teres</span> and the <span
data-type="term">pronator quadratus</span>, and the <span
data-type="term">supinator</span> is the only one that turns the forearm
anteriorly. When the forearm faces anteriorly, it is supinated. When the
forearm faces posteriorly, it is pronated.
{: #fs-id2271811}

The biceps brachii, brachialis, and brachioradialis flex the forearm.
The two-headed <span data-type="term">biceps brachii</span> crosses the
shoulder and elbow joints to flex the forearm, also taking part in
supinating the forearm at the radioulnar joints and flexing the arm at
the shoulder joint. Deep to the biceps brachii, the <span
data-type="term">brachialis</span> provides additional power in flexing
the forearm. Finally, the <span data-type="term">brachioradialis</span>
can flex the forearm quickly or help lift a load slowly. These muscles
and their associated blood vessels and nerves form the <span
data-type="term">anterior compartment of the arm</span> (anterior flexor
compartment of the arm) ([\[link\]](#fig-ch11_05_04){:
.autogenerated-content} and [\[link\]](#fig-ch11_05_05){:
.autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id2831016}

<figure id="fig-ch11_05_04">
<div data-type="title">
Muscles That Move the Forearm
</div>
<figcaption>
The muscles originating in the upper arm flex, extend, pronate, and
supinate the forearm. The muscles originating in the forearm move the
wrists, hands, and fingers.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1762152" data-alt="This multipart
figure shows the different muscles that move the forearm. The major
muscle groups are labeled."> ![This multipart figure shows the different
muscles that move the forearm. The major muscle groups are
labeled.](../resources/1120_Muscles_that_Move_the_Forearm.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="630"} </span>
</figure>
<figure id="fig-ch11_05_05">
<div data-type="title">
Muscles That Move the Forearm
</div>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2515826" data-alt="This table describes
the muscles that move the forearm. The biceps brachii are anterior
muscles that perform a bicep curl; they also allow the palm of the hand
to point toward the body while flexing. They originate in the coracoid
process and the tubercle above the glenoid cavity. The brachialis
originates in the front of the distal humerus. The brachioradialis is an
anterior muscle that assists and stablizes the elbow during bicep-curl
motion. It originates in the lateral supracondylar ridge at the distal
end of the humerus. The triceps brachii are posterior muscles that
extend the forearm, as during a punch. They originate in the
infraglenoid tubercle of the scapula, the posterior shaft of the
humerus, and the posterior humeral shaft distal to the radial groove.
The aconeus is a posterior muscle that assists in extending the forearm;
it also allows the forearm to extend away from the body. It originates
in the lateral epicondyle of the humerus. The pronator teres is an
anterior muscle that turns the hand palm-down. It originates in the
medial epicondyle of the humerus and the coronoid process of the ulna.
The pronator quadratus is an anterior muscle that assists in turning the
hand palm-down. It originates in the distal portion of the anterior
ulnar shaft. The supinator is a posterior muscle that turns the hand
palm-down. It originates in the lateral epicondyle of the humerus and
the proximal ulna."> ![This table describes the muscles that move the
forearm. The biceps brachii are anterior muscles that perform a bicep
curl; they also allow the palm of the hand to point toward the body
while flexing. They originate in the coracoid process and the tubercle
above the glenoid cavity. The brachialis originates in the front of the
distal humerus. The brachioradialis is an anterior muscle that assists
and stablizes the elbow during bicep-curl motion. It originates in the
lateral supracondylar ridge at the distal end of the humerus. The
triceps brachii are posterior muscles that extend the forearm, as during
a punch. They originate in the infraglenoid tubercle of the scapula, the
posterior shaft of the humerus, and the posterior humeral shaft distal
to the radial groove. The aconeus is a posterior muscle that assists in
extending the forearm; it also allows the forearm to extend away from
the body. It originates in the lateral epicondyle of the humerus. The
pronator teres is an anterior muscle that turns the hand palm-down. It
originates in the medial epicondyle of the humerus and the coronoid
process of the ulna. The pronator quadratus is an anterior muscle that
assists in turning the hand palm-down. It originates in the distal
portion of the anterior ulnar shaft. The supinator is a posterior muscle
that turns the hand palm-down. It originates in the lateral epicondyle
of the humerus and the proximal
ulna.](../resources/1130_Muscles_that_Move_the_Forearm.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="520"} </span>
</figure>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2145937" markdown="1">
# Muscles That Move the Wrist, Hand, and Fingers
{: data-type="title"}

Wrist, hand, and finger movements are facilitated by two groups of
muscles. The forearm is the origin of the <span
data-type="term">extrinsic muscles of the hand</span>. The palm is the
origin of the intrinsic muscles of the hand.
{: #fs-id2532289}

<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id2000325" markdown="1">
## Muscles of the Arm That Move the Wrists, Hands, and Fingers
{: data-type="title"}

The muscles in the <span data-type="term">anterior compartment of the
forearm</span> (anterior flexor compartment of the forearm) originate on
the humerus and insert onto different parts of the hand. These make up
the bulk of the forearm. From lateral to medial, the <span
data-type="term">superficial anterior compartment of the forearm</span>
includes the <span data-type="term">flexor carpi radialis</span>, <span
data-type="term">palmaris longus</span>, <span data-type="term">flexor
carpi ulnaris</span>, and <span data-type="term">flexor digitorum
superficialis</span>. The flexor digitorum superficialis flexes the hand
as well as the digits at the knuckles, which allows for rapid finger
movements, as in typing or playing a musical instrument (see
[\[link\]](#fig-ch11_05_06){: .autogenerated-content} and
[\[link\]](#tbl-ch11_09){: .autogenerated-content}). However, poor
ergonomics can irritate the tendons of these muscles as they slide back
and forth with the carpal tunnel of the anterior wrist and pinch the
median nerve, which also travels through the tunnel, causing Carpal
Tunnel Syndrome. The <span data-type="term">deep anterior
compartment</span> produces flexion and bends fingers to make a fist.
These are the <span data-type="term">flexor pollicis longus</span> and
the <span data-type="term">flexor digitorum profundus</span>.
{: #fs-id3304716}

The muscles in the <span data-type="term">superficial posterior
compartment of the forearm</span> (superficial posterior extensor
compartment of the forearm) originate on the humerus. These are the
<span data-type="term">extensor radialis longus</span>, <span
data-type="term">extensor carpi radialis brevis</span>, <span
data-type="term">extensor digitorum</span>, <span
data-type="term">extensor digiti minimi</span>, and the <span
data-type="term">extensor carpi ulnaris</span>.
{: #fs-id1629728}

The muscles of the <span data-type="term">deep posterior compartment of
the forearm</span> (deep posterior extensor compartment of the forearm)
originate on the radius and ulna. These include the <span
data-type="term">abductor pollicis longus</span>, <span
data-type="term">extensor pollicis brevis</span>, <span
data-type="term">extensor pollicis longus</span>, and <span
data-type="term">extensor indicis</span> (see
[\[link\]](#fig-ch11_05_06){: .autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id2515987}

<figure id="fig-ch11_05_06">
<div data-type="title">
Muscles That Move the Wrist, Hands, and Forearm
</div>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1908413" data-alt="This table describes
the muscles that move the wrist, hands, and forearm. These muscles make
up the superficial anterior compartment of the forearm. The flexor carpi
radialis bends the wrist toward the body; it also tilts the hand to the
side away from the body. It originates in the medial epicondyle of the
humerus. The palmaris longus assists in bending the hand up toward the
shoulder. It originates in the medial epicondyle of the humerus. The
flexor carpi ulnaris assists in bending the hand up toward the shoulder;
it also tilts the hand to the side away from the body and stabilizes the
wrist. It originates in the medial epicondyle of the humerus, the
olecranon process, and the posterior surface of the ulna. The flexor
digitorum superficialis bends the fingers to make a fist. It originates
in the medial epicondyle of the humerus, the coronoid process of the
ulna, and the shaft of the radius. These muscles make up the deep
anterior compartment of the forearm. The flexor pollicis longus bends
the tip of the thumb. It originates in the anterior surface of the
radius and the interosseous membrane. The flexor digitorum profundus
bends the fingers to make a fist; it also bends the wrist toward the
body. It originates in the coronoid process, the anteromedial surface of
the ulna, and the interosseous membrane. These muscles make up the
superficial posterior compartment of the forearm. The extensor radialis
longus straightens the wrist away from the body; it also tilts the hand
to the side away from the body. It originates in the lateral
supracondylar ridge of the humerus. The extensor carpi radialis brevis
assists the extensor radialis longus in extending and abducting the
wrist; it also stabilizes the hand during finger flexion. It originates
in the lateral epicondyle of the humerus. The extensor digitorum opens
the fingers and moves them sideways away from the body. It originates in
the lateral epicondyle of the humerus. The extensor digiti minimi
extends the little finger. It originates in the lateral epicondyle of
the humerus. The extensor carpi ulnaris straightens the wrist away from
the body; it also tilts the hand to the side toward the body. It
originates in the lateral epicondyle of the humerus and the posterior of
the ulna. These muscles make up the deep posterior compartment of the
forearm. The abductor pollicis longus moves the thumb sideways toward
the body; it also extends the thumb and moves the hand sideways toward
the body. It originates in the posterior surface of the radius and ulna
and in the interosseous membrane. The extensor pollicis brevis extends
the thumb. It originates in the dorsal shaft of the radius and ulna and
in the interosseous membrane. The extensor pollicis longus extends the
thumb. It originates in the dorsal shaft of the radius and ulna and in
the interosseous membrane. The extensor indicis extends the index
finger; it also straightens the wrist away from the body. It originates
in the posterior surface of the distal ulna and in the interosseous
membrane."> ![This table describes the muscles that move the wrist,
hands, and forearm. These muscles make up the superficial anterior
compartment of the forearm. The flexor carpi radialis bends the wrist
toward the body; it also tilts the hand to the side away from the body.
It originates in the medial epicondyle of the humerus. The palmaris
longus assists in bending the hand up toward the shoulder. It originates
in the medial epicondyle of the humerus. The flexor carpi ulnaris
assists in bending the hand up toward the shoulder; it also tilts the
hand to the side away from the body and stabilizes the wrist. It
originates in the medial epicondyle of the humerus, the olecranon
process, and the posterior surface of the ulna. The flexor digitorum
superficialis bends the fingers to make a fist. It originates in the
medial epicondyle of the humerus, the coronoid process of the ulna, and
the shaft of the radius. These muscles make up the deep anterior
compartment of the forearm. The flexor pollicis longus bends the tip of
the thumb. It originates in the anterior surface of the radius and the
interosseous membrane. The flexor digitorum profundus bends the fingers
to make a fist; it also bends the wrist toward the body. It originates
in the coronoid process, the anteromedial surface of the ulna, and the
interosseous membrane. These muscles make up the superficial posterior
compartment of the forearm. The extensor radialis longus straightens the
wrist away from the body; it also tilts the hand to the side away from
the body. It originates in the lateral supracondylar ridge of the
humerus. The extensor carpi radialis brevis assists the extensor
radialis longus in extending and abducting the wrist; it also stabilizes
the hand during finger flexion. It originates in the lateral epicondyle
of the humerus. The extensor digitorum opens the fingers and moves them
sideways away from the body. It originates in the lateral epicondyle of
the humerus. The extensor digiti minimi extends the little finger. It
originates in the lateral epicondyle of the humerus. The extensor carpi
ulnaris straightens the wrist away from the body; it also tilts the hand
to the side toward the body. It originates in the lateral epicondyle of
the humerus and the posterior of the ulna. These muscles make up the
deep posterior compartment of the forearm. The abductor pollicis longus
moves the thumb sideways toward the body; it also extends the thumb and
moves the hand sideways toward the body. It originates in the posterior
surface of the radius and ulna and in the interosseous membrane. The
extensor pollicis brevis extends the thumb. It originates in the dorsal
shaft of the radius and ulna and in the interosseous membrane. The
extensor pollicis longus extends the thumb. It originates in the dorsal
shaft of the radius and ulna and in the interosseous membrane. The
extensor indicis extends the index finger; it also straightens the wrist
away from the body. It originates in the posterior surface of the distal
ulna and in the interosseous
membrane.](../resources/1131_Muscles_that_Moves_the_Wrist_Hands_and_Fingers.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="540"} </span>
</figure>
The tendons of the forearm muscles attach to the wrist and extend into
the hand. Fibrous bands called <span data-type="term">retinacula</span>
sheath the tendons at the wrist. The <span data-type="term">flexor
retinaculum</span> extends over the palmar surface of the hand while the
<span data-type="term">extensor retinaculum</span> extends over the
dorsal surface of the hand.
{: #fs-id1591494}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1409519" markdown="1">
## Intrinsic Muscles of the Hand
{: data-type="title"}

The <span data-type="term">intrinsic muscles of the hand</span> both
originate and insert within it ([\[link\]](#fig-ch11_05_07){:
.autogenerated-content}). These muscles allow your fingers to also make
precise movements for actions, such as typing or writing. These muscles
are divided into three groups. The <span data-type="term">thenar</span>
muscles are on the radial aspect of the palm. The <span
data-type="term">hypothenar</span> muscles are on the medial aspect of
the palm, and the <span data-type="term">intermediate</span> muscles are
midpalmar.
{: #fs-id2632952}

The thenar muscles include the <span data-type="term">abductor pollicis
brevis</span>, <span data-type="term">opponens pollicis</span>, <span
data-type="term">flexor pollicis brevis</span>, and the <span
data-type="term">adductor pollicis</span>. These muscles form the <span
data-type="term">thenar eminence</span>, the rounded contour of the base
of the thumb, and all act on the thumb. The movements of the thumb play
an integral role in most precise movements of the hand.
{: #fs-id2345635}

The hypothenar muscles include the <span data-type="term">abductor
digiti minimi</span>, <span data-type="term">flexor digiti minimi
brevis</span>, and the <span data-type="term">opponens digiti
minimi</span>. These muscles form the <span data-type="term">hypothenar
eminence</span>, the rounded contour of the little finger, and as such,
they all act on the little finger. Finally, the intermediate muscles act
on all the fingers and include the <span
data-type="term">lumbrical</span>, the <span data-type="term">palmar
interossei</span>, and the <span data-type="term">dorsal
interossei</span>.
{: #fs-id1983771}

<figure id="fig-ch11_05_07">
<div data-type="title">
Intrinsic Muscles of the Hand
</div>
<figcaption>
The intrinsic muscles of the hand both originate and insert within the
hand. These muscles provide the fine motor control of the fingers by
flexing, extending, abducting, and adducting the more distal finger and
thumb segments.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2078691" data-alt="This multipart
figure shows the intrinsic muscles of the hand with the major muscle
groups labeled."> ![This multipart figure shows the intrinsic muscles of
the hand with the major muscle groups
labeled.](../resources/1121_Intrinsic_Muscles_of_the_Hand.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="480"} </span>
</figure>
<table id="tbl-ch11_09" summary=""><thead> <tr> <th colspan="7">Intrinsic Muscles of the Hand</th> </tr> <tr> <th>Muscle</th> <th>Movement</th> <th>Target</th> <th>Target motion direction</th> <th>Prime mover</th> <th>Origin</th> <th>Insertion</th> </tr> </thead><tbody> <tr> <td>Thenar muscles</td> <td>Moves thumb toward body</td> <td>Thumb</td> <td>Abduction</td> <td>Abductor pollicis brevis</td> <td>Flexor retinaculum; and nearby carpals</td> <td>Lateral base of proximal phalanx of thumb</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Thenar muscles</td> <td>Moves thumb across palm to touch other fingers</td> <td>Thumb</td> <td>Opposition</td> <td>Opponens pollicis</td> <td>Flexor retinaculum; trapezium</td> <td>Anterior of first metacarpal</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Thenar muscles</td> <td>Flexes thumb</td> <td>Thumb</td> <td>Flexion</td> <td>Flexor pollicis brevis</td> <td>Flexor retinaculum; trapezium</td> <td>Lateral base of proximal phalanx of thumb</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Thenar muscles</td> <td>Moves thumb away from body</td> <td>Thumb</td> <td>Adduction</td> <td>Adductor pollicis</td> <td>Capitate bone; bases of metacarpals 2–4; front of metacarpal 3</td> <td>Medial base of proximal phalanx of thumb</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Hypothenar muscles</td> <td>Moves little finger toward body</td> <td>Little finger</td> <td>Abduction</td> <td>Abductor digiti minimi</td> <td>Pisiform bone</td> <td>Medial side of proximal phalanx of little finger</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Hypothenar muscles</td> <td>Flexes little finger</td> <td>Little finger</td> <td>Flexion</td> <td>Flexor digiti minimi brevis</td> <td>Hamate bone; flexor retinaculum</td> <td>Medial side of proximal phalanx of little finger</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Hypothenar muscles</td> <td>Moves little finger across palm to touch thumb</td> <td>Little finger</td> <td>Opposition</td> <td>Opponens digiti minimi</td> <td>Hamate bone; flexor retinaculum</td> <td>Medial side of fifth metacarpal</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Intermediate muscles</td> <td>Flexes each finger at metacarpo-phalangeal joints; extends each finger at interphalangeal joints</td> <td>Fingers</td> <td>Flexion</td> <td>Lumbricals</td> <td>Palm (lateral sides of tendons in flexor digitorum profundus)</td> <td>Fingers 2–5 (lateral edges of extensional expansions on first phalanges)</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Intermediate muscles</td> <td>Adducts and flexes each finger at metacarpo-phalangeal joints; extends each finger at interphalangeal joints</td> <td>Fingers</td> <td>Adduction; flexion; extension</td> <td>Palmar interossei</td> <td>Side of each metacarpal that faces metacarpal 3 (absent from metacarpal 3)</td> <td>Extensor expansion on first phalanx of each finger (except finger 3) on side facing finger 3</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Intermediate muscles</td> <td>Abducts and flexes the three middle fingers at metacarpo-phalangeal joints; extends the three middle fingers at interphalangeal joints</td> <td>Fingers</td> <td>Abduction; flexion; extension</td> <td>Dorsal interossei</td> <td>Sides of metacarpals</td> <td>Both sides of finger 3; for each other finger, extensor expansion over first phalanx on side opposite finger 3</td> </tr> </tbody></table>
</section>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2261532" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

The clavicle and scapula make up the pectoral girdle, which provides a
stable origin for the muscles that move the humerus. The muscles that
position and stabilize the pectoral girdle are located on the thorax.
The anterior thoracic muscles are the subclavius, pectoralis minor, and
the serratus anterior. The posterior thoracic muscles are the trapezius,
levator scapulae, rhomboid major, and rhomboid minor. Nine muscles cross
the shoulder joint to move the humerus. The ones that originate on the
axial skeleton are the pectoralis major and the latissimus dorsi. The
deltoid, subscapularis, supraspinatus, infraspinatus, teres major, teres
minor, and coracobrachialis originate on the scapula.
{: #fs-id1389703}

The forearm flexors include the biceps brachii, brachialis, and
brachioradialis. The extensors are the triceps brachii and anconeus. The
pronators are the pronator teres and the pronator quadratus. The
supinator is the only one that turns the forearm anteriorly.
{: #fs-id2443705}

The extrinsic muscles of the hands originate along the forearm and
insert into the hand in order to facilitate crude movements of the
wrists, hands, and fingers. The superficial anterior compartment of the
forearm produces flexion. These muscles are the flexor carpi radialis,
palmaris longus, flexor carpi ulnaris, and the flexor digitorum
superficialis. The deep anterior compartment produces flexion as well.
These are the flexor pollicis longus and the flexor digitorum profundus.
The rest of the compartments produce extension. The extensor carpi
radialis longus, extensor carpi radialis brevis, extensor digitorum,
extensor digiti minimi, and extensor carpi ulnaris are the muscles found
in the superficial posterior compartment. The deep posterior compartment
includes the abductor longus, extensor pollicis brevis, extensor
pollicis longus, and the extensor indicis.
{: #fs-id2483384}

Finally, the intrinsic muscles of the hands allow our fingers to make
precise movements, such as typing and writing. They both originate and
insert within the hand. The thenar muscles, which are located on the
lateral part of the palm, are the abductor pollicis brevis, opponens
pollicis, flexor pollicis brevis, and adductor pollicis. The hypothenar
muscles, which are located on the medial part of the palm, are the
abductor digiti minimi, flexor digiti minimi brevis, and opponens digiti
minimi. The intermediate muscles, located in the middle of the palm, are
the lumbricals, palmar interossei, and dorsal interossei.
{: #fs-id1902876}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1765811" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2123552">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1490318" markdown="1">
The rhomboid major and minor muscles are deep to the ________.
{: #fs-id2162081}

1.  rectus abdominis
2.  scalene muscles
3.  trapezius
4.  ligamentum nuchae
{: #fs-id2310241 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2300357" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id2578258}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2044616">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1699690" markdown="1">
Which muscle extends the forearm?
{: #fs-id1699691}

1.  biceps brachii
2.  triceps brachii
3.  brachialis
4.  deltoid
{: #fs-id2265438 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2414307" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id1400680}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1854434">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2001780" markdown="1">
What is the origin of the wrist flexors?
{: #fs-id2759754}

1.  the lateral epicondyle of the humerus
2.  the medial epicondyle of the humerus
3.  the carpal bones of the wrist
4.  the deltoid tuberosity of the humerus
{: #fs-id1618180 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2139375" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id1364418}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1850372">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1404460" markdown="1">
Which muscles stabilize the pectoral girdle?
{: #fs-id1404461}

1.  axial and scapular
2.  axial
3.  appendicular
4.  axial and appendicular
{: #fs-id1367877 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2606627" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id2201130}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2763970" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2151945">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2100614" markdown="1">
The tendons of which muscles form the rotator cuff? Why is the rotator
cuff important?
{: #fs-id2100616}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2717807" data-label="" markdown="1">
Tendons of the infraspinatus, supraspinatus, teres minor, and the
subscapularis form the rotator cuff, which forms a foundation on which
the arms and shoulders can be stabilized and move.
{: #fs-id2059721}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2196608">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2264082" markdown="1">
List the general muscle groups of the shoulders and upper limbs as well
as their subgroups.
{: #fs-id2264083}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2516114" data-label="" markdown="1">
The muscles that make up the shoulders and upper limbs include the
muscles that position the pelvic girdle, the muscles that move the
humerus, the muscles that move the forearm, and the muscles that move
the wrists, hands, and fingers.
{: #fs-id2590271}

</div>
</div>
</section>



