---
title: Fibrous Joints
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Describe the structural features of fibrous joints
* Distinguish between a suture, syndesmosis, and gomphosis
* Give an example of each type of fibrous joint

</div>
At a fibrous joint, the adjacent bones are directly connected to each
other by fibrous connective tissue, and thus the bones do not have a
joint cavity between them ([\[link\]](#fig-ch09_02_01){:
.autogenerated-content}). The gap between the bones may be narrow or
wide. There are three types of fibrous joints. A suture is the narrow
fibrous joint found between most bones of the skull. At a syndesmosis
joint, the bones are more widely separated but are held together by a
narrow band of fibrous connective tissue called a <span
data-type="term">ligament</span> or a wide sheet of connective tissue
called an interosseous membrane. This type of fibrous joint is found
between the shaft regions of the long bones in the forearm and in the
leg. Lastly, a gomphosis is the narrow fibrous joint between the roots
of a tooth and the bony socket in the jaw into which the tooth fits.
{: #fs-id1747622}

<figure id="fig-ch09_02_01">
<div data-type="title">
Fibrous Joints
</div>
<figcaption>
Fibrous joints form strong connections between bones. (a) Sutures join
most bones of the skull. (b) An interosseous membrane forms a
syndesmosis between the radius and ulna bones of the forearm. (c) A
gomphosis is a specialized fibrous joint that anchors a tooth to its
socket in the jaw.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2527259" data-alt="This figure shows
the different types of fibrous joints. The right panel shows sutures,
the middle panel shows an interosseous membrane, and the left panel
shows a gomphosis."> ![This figure shows the different types of fibrous
joints. The right panel shows sutures, the middle panel shows an
interosseous membrane, and the left panel shows a
gomphosis.](../resources/904_Fibrous_Joints.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="520"} </span>
</figure>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2246959" markdown="1">
# Suture
{: data-type="title"}

All the bones of the skull, except for the mandible, are joined to each
other by a fibrous joint called a <span data-type="term">suture</span>.
The fibrous connective tissue found at a suture (“to bind or sew”)
strongly unites the adjacent skull bones and thus helps to protect the
brain and form the face. In adults, the skull bones are closely opposed
and fibrous connective tissue fills the narrow gap between the bones.
The suture is frequently convoluted, forming a tight union that prevents
most movement between the bones. (See [\[link\]](#fig-ch09_02_01){:
.autogenerated-content}**a**{: data-effect="bold"}.) Thus, skull sutures
are functionally classified as a synarthrosis, although some sutures may
allow for slight movements between the cranial bones.
{: #fs-id2663393}

In newborns and infants, the areas of connective tissue between the
bones are much wider, especially in those areas on the top and sides of
the skull that will become the sagittal, coronal, squamous, and lambdoid
sutures. These broad areas of connective tissue are called <span
data-type="term">fontanelles</span> ([\[link\]](#fig-ch09_02_02){:
.autogenerated-content}). During birth, the fontanelles provide
flexibility to the skull, allowing the bones to push closer together or
to overlap slightly, thus aiding movement of the infant’s head through
the birth canal. After birth, these expanded regions of connective
tissue allow for rapid growth of the skull and enlargement of the brain.
The fontanelles greatly decrease in width during the first year after
birth as the skull bones enlarge. When the connective tissue between the
adjacent bones is reduced to a narrow layer, these fibrous joints are
now called sutures. At some sutures, the connective tissue will ossify
and be converted into bone, causing the adjacent bones to fuse to each
other. This fusion between bones is called a <span
data-type="term">synostosis</span> (“joined by bone”). Examples of
synostosis fusions between cranial bones are found both early and late
in life. At the time of birth, the frontal and maxillary bones consist
of right and left halves joined together by sutures, which disappear by
the eighth year as the halves fuse together to form a single bone. Late
in life, the sagittal, coronal, and lambdoid sutures of the skull will
begin to ossify and fuse, causing the suture line to gradually
disappear.
{: #fs-id2293668}

<figure id="fig-ch09_02_02">
<div data-type="title">
The Newborn Skull
</div>
<figcaption>
The fontanelles of a newborn’s skull are broad areas of fibrous
connective tissue that form fibrous joints between the bones of the
skull.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1921672" data-alt="This figure shows
the lateral view of the newborn skull with the major parts labeled.">
![This figure shows the lateral view of the newborn skull with the major
parts labeled.](../resources/905_The_Newborn_Skull.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="380"} </span>
</figure>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2340781" markdown="1">
# Syndesmosis
{: data-type="title"}

A <span data-type="term">syndesmosis</span> (“fastened with a band”) is
a type of fibrous joint in which two parallel bones are united to each
other by fibrous connective tissue. The gap between the bones may be
narrow, with the bones joined by ligaments, or the gap may be wide and
filled in by a broad sheet of connective tissue called an <span
data-type="term">interosseous membrane</span>.
{: #fs-id2402858}

In the forearm, the wide gap between the shaft portions of the radius
and ulna bones are strongly united by an interosseous membrane (see
[\[link\]](#fig-ch09_02_01){: .autogenerated-content}**b**{:
data-effect="bold"}). Similarly, in the leg, the shafts of the tibia and
fibula are also united by an interosseous membrane. In addition, at the
distal tibiofibular joint, the articulating surfaces of the bones lack
cartilage and the narrow gap between the bones is anchored by fibrous
connective tissue and ligaments on both the anterior and posterior
aspects of the joint. Together, the interosseous membrane and these
ligaments form the tibiofibular syndesmosis.
{: #fs-id2122914}

The syndesmoses found in the forearm and leg serve to unite parallel
bones and prevent their separation. However, a syndesmosis does not
prevent all movement between the bones, and thus this type of fibrous
joint is functionally classified as an amphiarthrosis. In the leg, the
syndesmosis between the tibia and fibula strongly unites the bones,
allows for little movement, and firmly locks the talus bone in place
between the tibia and fibula at the ankle joint. This provides strength
and stability to the leg and ankle, which are important during weight
bearing. In the forearm, the interosseous membrane is flexible enough to
allow for rotation of the radius bone during forearm movements. Thus in
contrast to the stability provided by the tibiofibular syndesmosis, the
flexibility of the antebrachial interosseous membrane allows for the
much greater mobility of the forearm.
{: #fs-id2230731}

The interosseous membranes of the leg and forearm also provide areas for
muscle attachment. Damage to a syndesmotic joint, which usually results
from a fracture of the bone with an accompanying tear of the
interosseous membrane, will produce pain, loss of stability of the
bones, and may damage the muscles attached to the interosseous membrane.
If the fracture site is not properly immobilized with a cast or splint,
contractile activity by these muscles can cause improper alignment of
the broken bones during healing.
{: #fs-id1990565}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2025846" markdown="1">
# Gomphosis
{: data-type="title"}

A <span data-type="term">gomphosis</span> (“fastened with bolts”) is the
specialized fibrous joint that anchors the root of a tooth into its bony
socket within the maxillary bone (upper jaw) or mandible bone (lower
jaw) of the skull. A gomphosis is also known as a peg-and-socket joint.
Spanning between the bony walls of the socket and the root of the tooth
are numerous short bands of dense connective tissue, each of which is
called a <span data-type="term">periodontal ligament</span> (see
[\[link\]](#fig-ch09_02_01){: .autogenerated-content}**c**{:
data-effect="bold"}). Due to the immobility of a gomphosis, this type of
joint is functionally classified as a synarthrosis.
{: #fs-id2396893}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2125444" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

Fibrous joints are where adjacent bones are strongly united by fibrous
connective tissue. The gap filled by connective tissue may be narrow or
wide. The three types of fibrous joints are sutures, gomphoses, and
syndesmoses. A suture is the narrow fibrous joint that unites most bones
of the skull. At a gomphosis, the root of a tooth is anchored across a
narrow gap by periodontal ligaments to the walls of its socket in the
bony jaw. A syndesmosis is the type of fibrous joint found between
parallel bones. The gap between the bones may be wide and filled with a
fibrous interosseous membrane, or it may narrow with ligaments spanning
between the bones. Syndesmoses are found between the bones of the
forearm (radius and ulna) and the leg (tibia and fibula). Fibrous joints
strongly unite adjacent bones and thus serve to provide protection for
internal organs, strength to body regions, or weight-bearing stability.
{: #fs-id1235750}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2463893" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2242062">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1408829" markdown="1">
Which type of fibrous joint connects the tibia and fibula?
{: #fs-id1583142}

1.  syndesmosis
2.  symphysis
3.  suture
4.  gomphosis
{: #fs-id1473954 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2310777" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id1699247}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1374760">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2664476" markdown="1">
An example of a wide fibrous joint is ________.
{: #fs-id2644100}

1.  the interosseous membrane of the forearm
2.  a gomphosis
3.  a suture joint
4.  a synostosis
{: #fs-id2364217 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1698919" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id2370570}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2623907">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2521918" markdown="1">
A gomphosis ________.
{: #fs-id1430780}

1.  is formed by an interosseous membrane
2.  connects the tibia and fibula bones of the leg
3.  contains a joint cavity
4.  anchors a tooth to the jaw
{: #fs-id1838152 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1583170" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id2336852}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2060975">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1854863" markdown="1">
A syndesmosis is ________.
{: #fs-id1907504}

1.  a narrow fibrous joint
2.  the type of joint that unites bones of the skull
3.  a fibrous joint that unites parallel bones
4.  the type of joint that anchors the teeth in the jaws
{: #fs-id2079498 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1488481" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id2051504}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1905483" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2024053">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1195150" markdown="1">
Distinguish between a narrow and wide fibrous joint and give an example
of each.
{: #fs-id1701760}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1423119" data-label="" markdown="1">
Narrow fibrous joints are found at a suture, gomphosis, or syndesmosis.
A suture is the fibrous joint that joins the bones of the skull to each
other (except the mandible). A gomphosis is the fibrous joint that
anchors each tooth to its bony socket within the upper or lower jaw. The
tooth is connected to the bony jaw by periodontal ligaments. A narrow
syndesmosis is found at the distal tibiofibular joint where the bones
are united by fibrous connective tissue and ligaments. A syndesmosis can
also form a wide fibrous joint where the shafts of two parallel bones
are connected by a broad interosseous membrane. The radius and ulna
bones of the forearm and the tibia and fibula bones of the leg are
united by interosseous membranes.
{: #fs-id2576559}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2623484">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1398368" markdown="1">
The periodontal ligaments are made of collagen fibers and are
responsible for connecting the roots of the teeth to the jaws. Describe
how scurvy, a disease that inhibits collagen production, can affect the
teeth.
{: #fs-id1399844}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1221046" data-label="" markdown="1">
The teeth are anchored into their sockets within the bony jaws by the
periodontal ligaments. This is a gomphosis type of fibrous joint. In
scurvy, collagen production is inhibited and the periodontal ligaments
become weak. This will cause the teeth to become loose or even to fall
out.
{: #fs-id1926546}

</div>
</div>
</section>



