---
title: Energy and Heat Balance
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Describe how the body regulates temperature
* Explain the significance of the metabolic rate

</div>
The body tightly regulates the body temperature through a process called
<span data-type="term">thermoregulation</span>, in which the body can
maintain its temperature within certain boundaries, even when the
surrounding temperature is very different. The core temperature of the
body remains steady at around 36.5–37.5 °C (or 97.7–99.5 °F). In the
process of ATP production by cells throughout the body, approximately 60
percent of the energy produced is in the form of heat used to maintain
body temperature. Thermoregulation is an example of negative feedback.
{: #fs-id682405}

The hypothalamus in the brain is the master switch that works as a
thermostat to regulate the body’s core temperature
([\[link\]](#fig-ch25_06_01){: .autogenerated-content}). If the
temperature is too high, the hypothalamus can initiate several processes
to lower it. These include increasing the circulation of the blood to
the surface of the body to allow for the dissipation of heat through the
skin and initiation of sweating to allow evaporation of water on the
skin to cool its surface. Conversely, if the temperature falls below the
set core temperature, the hypothalamus can initiate shivering to
generate heat. The body uses more energy and generates more heat. In
addition, thyroid hormone will stimulate more energy use and heat
production by cells throughout the body. An environment is said to be
<span data-type="term">thermoneutral</span> when the body does not
expend or release energy to maintain its core temperature. For a naked
human, this is an ambient air temperature of around 84 °F. If the
temperature is higher, for example, when wearing clothes, the body
compensates with cooling mechanisms. The body loses heat through the
mechanisms of heat exchange.
{: #fs-id2165326}

<figure id="fig-ch25_06_01">
<div data-type="title">
Hypothalamus Controls Thermoregulation
</div>
<figcaption>
The hypothalamus controls thermoregulation.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1527637" data-alt="This figure shows
the pathways in which body temperature is controlled by the
hypothalamus."> ![This figure shows the pathways in which body
temperature is controlled by the hypothalamus.](../resources/2523_The
Hypothalamus_Controls_Thermoregulation.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="500"} </span>
</figure>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1616554" markdown="1">
# Mechanisms of Heat Exchange
{: data-type="title"}

When the environment is not thermoneutral, the body uses four mechanisms
of heat exchange to maintain homeostasis: conduction, convection,
radiation, and evaporation. Each of these mechanisms relies on the
property of heat to flow from a higher concentration to a lower
concentration; therefore, each of the mechanisms of heat exchange varies
in rate according to the temperature and conditions of the environment.
{: #fs-id2482509}

<span data-type="term">Conduction</span> is the transfer of heat by two
objects that are in direct contact with one another. It occurs when the
skin comes in contact with a cold or warm object. For example, when
holding a glass of ice water, the heat from your skin will warm the
glass and in turn melt the ice. Alternatively, on a cold day, you might
warm up by wrapping your cold hands around a hot mug of coffee. Only
about 3 percent of the body’s heat is lost through conduction.
{: #fs-id2698131}

<span data-type="term">Convection</span> is the transfer of heat to the
air surrounding the skin. The warmed air rises away from the body and is
replaced by cooler air that is subsequently heated. Convection can also
occur in water. When the water temperature is lower than the body’s
temperature, the body loses heat by warming the water closest to the
skin, which moves away to be replaced by cooler water. The convection
currents created by the temperature changes continue to draw heat away
from the body more quickly than the body can replace it, resulting in
hyperthermia. About 15 percent of the body’s heat is lost through
convection.
{: #fs-id1259250}

<span data-type="term">Radiation</span> is the transfer of heat via
infrared waves. This occurs between any two objects when their
temperatures differ. A radiator can warm a room via radiant heat. On a
sunny day, the radiation from the sun warms the skin. The same principle
works from the body to the environment. About 60 percent of the heat
lost by the body is lost through radiation.
{: #fs-id2802463}

<span data-type="term">Evaporation</span> is the transfer of heat by the
evaporation of water. Because it takes a great deal of energy for a
water molecule to change from a liquid to a gas, evaporating water (in
the form of sweat) takes with it a great deal of energy from the skin.
However, the rate at which evaporation occurs depends on relative
humidity—more sweat evaporates in lower humidity environments. Sweating
is the primary means of cooling the body during exercise, whereas at
rest, about 20 percent of the heat lost by the body occurs through
evaporation.
{: #fs-id3398548}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2935653" markdown="1">
# Metabolic Rate
{: data-type="title"}

The <span data-type="term">metabolic rate</span> is the amount of energy
consumed minus the amount of energy expended by the body. The <span
data-type="term">basal metabolic rate (BMR)</span> describes the amount
of daily energy expended by humans at rest, in a neutrally temperate
environment, while in the postabsorptive state. It measures how much
energy the body needs for normal, basic, daily activity. About 70
percent of all daily energy expenditure comes from the basic functions
of the organs in the body. Another 20 percent comes from physical
activity, and the remaining 10 percent is necessary for body
thermoregulation or temperature control. This rate will be higher if a
person is more active or has more lean body mass. As you age, the BMR
generally decreases as the percentage of less lean muscle mass
decreases.
{: #fs-id1964163}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2640422" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

Some of the energy from the food that is ingested is used to maintain
the core temperature of the body. Most of the energy derived from the
food is released as heat. The core temperature is kept around 36.5–37.5
°C (97.7–99.5 °F). This is tightly regulated by the hypothalamus in the
brain, which senses changes in the core temperature and operates like a
thermostat to increase sweating or shivering, or inducing other
mechanisms to return the temperature to its normal range. The body can
also gain or lose heat through mechanisms of heat exchange. Conduction
transfers heat from one object to another through physical contact.
Convection transfers heat to air or water. Radiation transfers heat via
infrared radiation. Evaporation transfers heat as water changes state
from a liquid to a gas.
{: #fs-id1589133}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2457070" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1720962">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1775362" markdown="1">
The body’s temperature is controlled by the ________. This temperature
is always kept between ________.
{: #fs-id2114442}

1.  pituitary; 36.5–37.5 °C
2.  hypothalamus; 97.7–99.5 °F
3.  hypothalamus; 36.5–37.5 °F
4.  pituitary; 97.7–99.5 °F
{: #fs-id1587848 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1743404" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id2880236}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2105111">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1396026" markdown="1">
Fever increases the body temperature and can induce chills to help cool
the temperature back down. What other mechanisms are in place to
regulate the body temperature?
{: #fs-id2189300}

1.  shivering
2.  sweating
3.  erection of the hairs on the arms and legs
4.  all of the above
{: #fs-id1749660 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2095820" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id3691086}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2161602">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1903962" markdown="1">
The heat you feel on your chair when you stand up was transferred from
your skin via ________.
{: #fs-id2478962}

1.  conduction
2.  convection
3.  radiation
4.  evaporation
{: #fs-id2169038 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1612761" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id1611075}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1620590">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2482408" markdown="1">
A crowded room warms up through the mechanism of ________.
{: #fs-id1984435}

1.  conduction
2.  convection
3.  radiation
4.  evaporation
{: #fs-id2463233 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1608947" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id1477263}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1845550" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2181283">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2801072" markdown="1">
How does vasoconstriction help increase the core temperature of the
body?
{: #fs-id1612295}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2398066" data-label="" markdown="1">
When blood flows to the outer layers of the skin or to the extremities,
heat is lost to the environment by the mechanisms of conduction,
convection, or radiation. This will cool the blood and the body.
Vasoconstriction helps increase the core body temperature by preventing
the flow of blood to the outer layer of the skin and outer parts of the
extremities.
{: #fs-id1758526}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2870043">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1468939" markdown="1">
How can the ingestion of food increase the body temperature?
{: #fs-id1930328}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2022151" data-label="" markdown="1">
The ingestion of food stimulates digestion and processing of the
carbohydrates, proteins, and fats. This breakdown of food triggers
glycolysis, the Krebs cycle, the electron transport chain, fatty acid
oxidation, lipogenesis, and amino acid oxidation to produce energy. Heat
is a byproduct of those reactions.
{: #fs-id2403190}

</div>
</div>
</section>



