---
title: The Urinary System and Homeostasis
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Describe the role of the kidneys in vitamin D activation
* Describe the role of the kidneys in regulating erythropoiesis
* Provide specific examples to demonstrate how the urinary system
  responds to maintain homeostasis in the body
* Explain how the urinary system relates to other body systems in
  maintaining homeostasis
* Predict factors or situations affecting the urinary system that could
  disrupt homeostasis
* Predict the types of problems that would occur in the body if the
  urinary system could not maintain homeostasis

</div>
All systems of the body are interrelated. A change in one system may
affect all other systems in the body, with mild to devastating effects.
A failure of urinary continence can be embarrassing and inconvenient,
but is not life threatening. The loss of other urinary functions may
prove fatal. A failure to synthesize vitamin D is one such example.
{: #fs-id2395185}

<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1586928" markdown="1">
# Vitamin D Synthesis
{: data-type="title"}

In order for vitamin D to become active, it must undergo a hydroxylation
reaction in the kidney, that is, an –OH group must be added to calcidiol
to make calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol). Activated vitamin D
is important for absorption of Ca<sup>++</sup> in the digestive tract,
its reabsorption in the kidney, and the maintenance of normal serum
concentrations of Ca<sup>++</sup> and phosphate. Calcium is vitally
important in bone health, muscle contraction, hormone secretion, and
neurotransmitter release. Inadequate Ca<sup>++</sup> leads to disorders
like osteoporosis and <span data-type="term">osteomalacia</span> in
adults and rickets in children. Deficits may also result in problems
with cell proliferation, neuromuscular function, blood clotting, and the
inflammatory response. Recent research has confirmed that vitamin D
receptors are present in most, if not all, cells of the body, reflecting
the systemic importance of vitamin D. Many scientists have suggested it
be referred to as a hormone rather than a vitamin.
{: #fs-id1586933}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2389244" markdown="1">
# Erythropoiesis
{: data-type="title"}

EPO is a 193-amino acid protein that stimulates the formation of red
blood cells in the bone marrow. The kidney produces 85 percent of
circulating EPO; the liver, the remainder. If you move to a higher
altitude, the partial pressure of oxygen is lower, meaning there is less
pressure to push oxygen across the alveolar membrane and into the red
blood cell. One way the body compensates is to manufacture more red
blood cells by increasing EPO production. If you start an aerobic
exercise program, your tissues will need more oxygen to cope, and the
kidney will respond with more EPO. If erythrocytes are lost due to
severe or prolonged bleeding, or under produced due to disease or severe
malnutrition, the kidneys come to the rescue by producing more EPO.
Renal failure (loss of EPO production) is associated with anemia, which
makes it difficult for the body to cope with increased oxygen demands or
to supply oxygen adequately even under normal conditions. Anemia
diminishes performance and can be life threatening.
{: #fs-id2801571}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2801575" markdown="1">
# Blood Pressure Regulation
{: data-type="title"}

Due to osmosis, water follows where Na<sup>+</sup> leads. Much of the
water the kidneys recover from the forming urine follows the
reabsorption of Na<sup>+</sup>. ADH stimulation of aquaporin channels
allows for regulation of water recovery in the collecting ducts.
Normally, all of the glucose is recovered, but loss of glucose control
(diabetes mellitus) may result in an osmotic dieresis severe enough to
produce severe dehydration and death. A loss of renal function means a
loss of effective vascular volume control, leading to hypotension (low
blood pressure) or hypertension (high blood pressure), which can lead to
stroke, heart attack, and aneurysm formation.
{: #fs-id2075904}

The kidneys cooperate with the lungs, liver, and adrenal cortex through
the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system (see
[\[link\]](/m46431#fig-ch26_04_04){: .autogenerated-content}). The liver
synthesizes and secretes the inactive precursor angiotensinogen. When
the blood pressure is low, the kidney synthesizes and releases renin.
Renin converts angiotensinogen into angiotensin I, and ACE produced in
the lung converts angiotensin I into biologically active angiotensin II
([\[link\]](#fig-ch26_10_01){: .autogenerated-content}). The immediate
and short-term effect of angiotensin II is to raise blood pressure by
causing widespread vasoconstriction. angiotensin II also stimulates the
adrenal cortex to release the steroid hormone aldosterone, which results
in renal reabsorption of Na<sup>+</sup> and its associated osmotic
recovery of water. The reabsorption of Na<sup>+ </sup>helps to raise and
maintain blood pressure over a longer term.
{: #fs-id2655063}

<figure id="fig-ch26_10_01">
<div data-type="title">
The Enzyme Renin Converts the Pro-enzyme Angiotensin
</div>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1724894" data-alt="Alt text to come.">
![Alt text to
come.](../resources/2624_The_Enzyme_Renin_Converts_The_Pro-Enzyme_Angiotensin_I.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="350"} </span>
</figure>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2096567" markdown="1">
# Regulation of Osmolarity
{: data-type="title"}

Blood pressure and osmolarity are regulated in a similar fashion. Severe
hypo-osmolarity can cause problems like lysis (rupture) of blood cells
or widespread edema, which is due to a solute imbalance. Inadequate
solute concentration (such as protein) in the plasma results in water
moving toward an area of greater solute concentration, in this case, the
interstitial space and cell cytoplasm. If the kidney glomeruli are
damaged by an autoimmune illness, large quantities of protein may be
lost in the urine. The resultant drop in serum osmolarity leads to
widespread edema that, if severe, may lead to damaging or fatal brain
swelling. Severe hypertonic conditions may arise with severe dehydration
from lack of water intake, severe vomiting, or uncontrolled diarrhea.
When the kidney is unable to recover sufficient water from the forming
urine, the consequences may be severe (lethargy, confusion, muscle
cramps, and finally, death) .
{: #fs-id2096572}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2662942" markdown="1">
# Recovery of Electrolytes
{: data-type="title"}

Sodium, calcium, and potassium must be closely regulated. The role of
Na<sup>+</sup> and Ca<sup>++</sup> homeostasis has been discussed at
length. Failure of K<sup>+</sup> regulation can have serious
consequences on nerve conduction, skeletal muscle function, and most
significantly, on cardiac muscle contraction and rhythm.
{: #fs-id1372003}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1881877" markdown="1">
# pH Regulation
{: data-type="title"}

Recall that enzymes lose their three-dimensional conformation and,
therefore, their function if the pH is too acidic or basic. This loss of
conformation may be a consequence of the breaking of hydrogen bonds.
Move the pH away from the optimum for a specific enzyme and you may
severely hamper its function throughout the body, including hormone
binding, central nervous system signaling, or myocardial contraction.
Proper kidney function is essential for pH homeostasis.
{: #fs-id2754584}

<div data-type="note" id="fs-id2238105" class="anatomy everyday" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Everyday Connection
</div>
<span data-type="title">Stem Cells and Repair of Kidney Damage</span>
Stem cells are unspecialized cells that can reproduce themselves via
cell division, sometimes after years of inactivity. Under certain
conditions, they may differentiate into tissue-specific or
organ-specific cells with special functions. In some cases, stem cells
may continually divide to produce a mature cell and to replace
themselves. Stem cell therapy has an enormous potential to improve the
quality of life or save the lives of people suffering from debilitating
or life-threatening diseases. There have been several studies in
animals, but since stem cell therapy is still in its infancy, there have
been limited experiments in humans.
{: #fs-id1972052}

Acute kidney injury can be caused by a number of factors, including
transplants and other surgeries. It affects 7–10 percent of all
hospitalized patients, resulting in the deaths of 35–40 percent of
inpatients. In limited studies using mesenchymal stem cells, there have
been fewer instances of kidney damage after surgery, the length of
hospital stays has been reduced, and there have been fewer readmissions
after release.
{: #fs-id2228977}

How do these stem cells work to protect or repair the kidney? Scientists
are unsure at this point, but some evidence has shown that these stem
cells release several growth factors in endocrine and paracrine ways. As
further studies are conducted to assess the safety and effectiveness of
stem cell therapy, we will move closer to a day when kidney injury is
rare, and curative treatments are routine.
{: #fs-id2228980}

</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1959386" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

The effects of failure of parts of the urinary system may range from
inconvenient (incontinence) to fatal (loss of filtration and many
others). The kidneys catalyze the final reaction in the synthesis of
active vitamin D that in turn helps regulate Ca<sup>++</sup>. The kidney
hormone EPO stimulates erythrocyte development and promotes adequate
O<sub>2</sub> transport. The kidneys help regulate blood pressure
through Na<sup>+</sup> and water retention and loss. The kidneys work
with the adrenal cortex, lungs, and liver in the
renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system to regulate blood pressure. They
regulate osmolarity of the blood by regulating both solutes and water.
Three electrolytes are more closely regulated than others:
Na<sup>+</sup>, Ca<sup>++</sup>, and K<sup>+</sup>. The kidneys share pH
regulation with the lungs and plasma buffers, so that proteins can
preserve their three-dimensional conformation and thus their function.
{: #fs-id2844948}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2662542" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2138805">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2138807" markdown="1">
Which step in vitamin D production does the kidney perform?
{: #fs-id2138808}

1.  converts cholecalciferol into calcidiol
2.  converts calcidiol into calcitriol
3.  stores vitamin D
4.  none of these
{: #fs-id2285421 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2675265" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id2253516}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2586003">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2586005" markdown="1">
Which hormone does the kidney produce that stimulates red blood cell
production?
{: #fs-id2586006}

1.  thrombopoeitin
2.  vitamin D
3.  EPO
4.  renin
{: #fs-id2078636 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2675740" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id1493374}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2574092">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2574094" markdown="1">
If there were no aquaporin channels in the collecting duct, ________.
{: #fs-id2574095}

1.  you would develop systemic edema
2.  you would retain excess Na<sup>+</sup>
3.  you would lose vitamins and electrolytes
4.  you would suffer severe dehydration
{: #fs-id2527874 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2255633" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id2174780}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1928469" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2212426">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2212429" markdown="1">
How does lack of protein in the blood cause edema?
{: #fs-id2116117}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2116120" data-label="" markdown="1">
Protein has osmotic properties. If there is not enough protein in the
blood, water will be attracted to the interstitial space and the cell
cytoplasm resulting in tissue edema.
{: #fs-id1967379}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id3908708">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id3908710" markdown="1">
Which three electrolytes are most closely regulated by the kidney?
{: #fs-id3908711}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2042223" data-label="" markdown="1">
The three electrolytes are most closely regulated by the kidney are
calcium, sodium, and potassium.
{: #fs-id2042226}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id616490" class="references" markdown="1">
# References
{: data-type="title"}

Bagul A, Frost JH, Drage M. Stem cells and their role in renal ischaemia
reperfusion injury. Am J Nephrol \[Internet\]. 2013 \[cited 2013 Apr
15\]; 37(1):16–29. Available from:
[http://www.karger.com/Article/FullText/345731][1]
{: #fs-id1406217}

</section>




[1]: http://www.karger.com/Article/FullText/345731

