---
title: Types of Muscle Fibers
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Describe the types of skeletal muscle fibers
* Explain fast and slow muscle fibers

</div>
Two criteria to consider when classifying the types of muscle fibers are
how fast some fibers contract relative to others, and how fibers produce
ATP. Using these criteria, there are three main types of skeletal muscle
fibers. <span data-type="term">Slow oxidative (SO)</span> fibers
contract relatively slowly and use aerobic respiration (oxygen and
glucose) to produce ATP. <span data-type="term">Fast oxidative
(FO)</span> fibers have fast contractions and primarily use aerobic
respiration, but because they may switch to anaerobic respiration
(glycolysis), can fatigue more quickly than SO fibers. Lastly, <span
data-type="term">fast glycolytic (FG)</span> fibers have fast
contractions and primarily use anaerobic glycolysis. The FG fibers
fatigue more quickly than the others. Most skeletal muscles in a human
contain(s) all three types, although in varying proportions.
{: #fs-id1282811}

The speed of contraction is dependent on how quickly myosin’s ATPase
hydrolyzes ATP to produce cross-bridge action. Fast fibers hydrolyze ATP
approximately twice as quickly as slow fibers, resulting in much quicker
cross-bridge cycling (which pulls the thin filaments toward the center
of the sarcomeres at a faster rate). The primary metabolic pathway used
by a muscle fiber determines whether the fiber is classified as
oxidative or glycolytic. If a fiber primarily produces ATP through
aerobic pathways it is oxidative. More ATP can be produced during each
metabolic cycle, making the fiber more resistant to fatigue. Glycolytic
fibers primarily create ATP through anaerobic glycolysis, which produces
less ATP per cycle. As a result, glycolytic fibers fatigue at a quicker
rate.
{: #fs-id1905669}

The oxidative fibers contain many more mitochondria than the glycolytic
fibers, because aerobic metabolism, which uses oxygen (O<sub>2</sub>) in
the metabolic pathway, occurs in the mitochondria. The SO fibers possess
a large number of mitochondria and are capable of contracting for longer
periods because of the large amount of ATP they can produce, but they
have a relatively small diameter and do not produce a large amount of
tension. SO fibers are extensively supplied with blood capillaries to
supply O<sub>2</sub> from the red blood cells in the bloodstream. The SO
fibers also possess myoglobin, an O<sub>2</sub>-carrying molecule
similar to O<sub>2</sub>-carrying hemoglobin in the red blood cells. The
myoglobin stores some of the needed O<sub>2</sub> within the fibers
themselves (and gives SO fibers their red color). All of these features
allow SO fibers to produce large quantities of ATP, which can sustain
muscle activity without fatiguing for long periods of time.
{: #fs-id1640470}

The fact that SO fibers can function for long periods without fatiguing
makes them useful in maintaining posture, producing isometric
contractions, stabilizing bones and joints, and making small movements
that happen often but do not require large amounts of energy. They do
not produce high tension, and thus they are not used for powerful, fast
movements that require high amounts of energy and rapid cross-bridge
cycling.
{: #fs-id2460105}

FO fibers are sometimes called intermediate fibers because they possess
characteristics that are intermediate between fast fibers and slow
fibers. They produce ATP relatively quickly, more quickly than SO
fibers, and thus can produce relatively high amounts of tension. They
are oxidative because they produce ATP aerobically, possess high amounts
of mitochondria, and do not fatigue quickly. However, FO fibers do not
possess significant myoglobin, giving them a lighter color than the red
SO fibers. FO fibers are used primarily for movements, such as walking,
that require more energy than postural control but less energy than an
explosive movement, such as sprinting. FO fibers are useful for this
type of movement because they produce more tension than SO fibers but
they are more fatigue-resistant than FG fibers.
{: #fs-id1424369}

FG fibers primarily use anaerobic glycolysis as their ATP source. They
have a large diameter and possess high amounts of glycogen, which is
used in glycolysis to generate ATP quickly to produce high levels of
tension. Because they do not primarily use aerobic metabolism, they do
not possess substantial numbers of mitochondria or significant amounts
of myoglobin and therefore have a white color. FG fibers are used to
produce rapid, forceful contractions to make quick, powerful movements.
These fibers fatigue quickly, permitting them to only be used for short
periods. Most muscles possess a mixture of each fiber type. The
predominant fiber type in a muscle is determined by the primary function
of the muscle.
{: #fs-id1207069}

<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1408929" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

ATP provides the energy for muscle contraction. The three mechanisms for
ATP regeneration are creatine phosphate, anaerobic glycolysis, and
aerobic metabolism. Creatine phosphate provides about the first 15
seconds of ATP at the beginning of muscle contraction. Anaerobic
glycolysis produces small amounts of ATP in the absence of oxygen for a
short period. Aerobic metabolism utilizes oxygen to produce much more
ATP, allowing a muscle to work for longer periods. Muscle fatigue, which
has many contributing factors, occurs when muscle can no longer
contract. An oxygen debt is created as a result of muscle use. The three
types of muscle fiber are slow oxidative (SO), fast oxidative (FO) and
fast glycolytic (FG). SO fibers use aerobic metabolism to produce low
power contractions over long periods and are slow to fatigue. FO fibers
use aerobic metabolism to produce ATP but produce higher tension
contractions than SO fibers. FG fibers use anaerobic metabolism to
produce powerful, high-tension contractions but fatigue quickly.
{: #fs-id2030750}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1582150" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1939556">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2199373" markdown="1">
Muscle fatigue is caused by ________.
{: #fs-id1401365}

1.  buildup of ATP and lactic acid levels
2.  exhaustion of energy reserves and buildup of lactic acid levels
3.  buildup of ATP and pyruvic acid levels
4.  exhaustion of energy reserves and buildup of pyruvic acid levels
{: #fs-id2327137 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1760745" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id2254399}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2068349">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2301926" markdown="1">
A sprinter would experience muscle fatigue sooner than a marathon runner
due to ________.
{: #fs-id2102925}

1.  anaerobic metabolism in the muscles of the sprinter
2.  anaerobic metabolism in the muscles of the marathon runner
3.  aerobic metabolism in the muscles of the sprinter
4.  glycolysis in the muscles of the marathon runner
{: #fs-id2023511 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2071590" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id1905850}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1349513">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1363989" markdown="1">
What aspect of creatine phosphate allows it to supply energy to muscles?
{: #fs-id2338492}

1.  ATPase activity
2.  phosphate bonds
3.  carbon bonds
4.  hydrogen bonds
{: #fs-id2125273 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2266904" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id1707608}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1394945">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1353004" markdown="1">
Drug X blocks ATP regeneration from ADP and phosphate. How will muscle
cells respond to this drug?
{: #fs-id2349785}

1.  by absorbing ATP from the bloodstream
2.  by using ADP as an energy source
3.  by using glycogen as an energy source
4.  none of the above
{: #fs-id1414548 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2135106" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id1279730}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2326874" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2267554">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1415601" markdown="1">
Why do muscle cells use creatine phosphate instead of glycolysis to
supply ATP for the first few seconds of muscle contraction?
{: #fs-id2363805}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1644876" data-label="" markdown="1">
Creatine phosphate is used because creatine phosphate and ADP are
converted very quickly into ATP by creatine kinase. Glycolysis cannot
generate ATP as quickly as creatine phosphate.
{: #fs-id2240374}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1844803">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2019847" markdown="1">
Is aerobic respiration more or less efficient than glycolysis? Explain
your answer.
{: #fs-id2017671}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2031270" data-label="" markdown="1">
Aerobic respiration is much more efficient than anaerobic glycolysis,
yielding 36 ATP per molecule of glucose, as opposed to two ATP produced
by glycolysis.
{: #fs-id1383650}

</div>
</div>
</section>



