---
title: Exercise and Muscle Performance
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Describe hypertrophy and atrophy
* Explain how resistance exercise builds muscle
* Explain how performance-enhancing substances affect muscle

</div>
Physical training alters the appearance of skeletal muscles and can
produce changes in muscle performance. Conversely, a lack of use can
result in decreased performance and muscle appearance. Although muscle
cells can change in size, new cells are not formed when muscles grow.
Instead, structural proteins are added to muscle fibers in a process
called <span data-type="term">hypertrophy</span>, so cell diameter
increases. The reverse, when structural proteins are lost and muscle
mass decreases, is called <span data-type="term">atrophy</span>.
Age-related muscle atrophy is called <span
data-type="term">sarcopenia</span>. Cellular components of muscles can
also undergo changes in response to changes in muscle use.
{: #fs-id1584189}

<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1195292" markdown="1">
# Endurance Exercise
{: data-type="title"}

Slow fibers are predominantly used in endurance exercises that require
little force but involve numerous repetitions. The aerobic metabolism
used by slow-twitch fibers allows them to maintain contractions over
long periods. Endurance training modifies these slow fibers to make them
even more efficient by producing more mitochondria to enable more
aerobic metabolism and more ATP production. Endurance exercise can also
increase the amount of myoglobin in a cell, as increased aerobic
respiration increases the need for oxygen. Myoglobin is found in the
sarcoplasm and acts as an oxygen storage supply for the mitochondria.
{: #fs-id2364284}

The training can trigger the formation of more extensive capillary
networks around the fiber, a process called <span
data-type="term">angiogenesis</span>, to supply oxygen and remove
metabolic waste. To allow these capillary networks to supply the deep
portions of the muscle, muscle mass does not greatly increase in order
to maintain a smaller area for the diffusion of nutrients and gases. All
of these cellular changes result in the ability to sustain low levels of
muscle contractions for greater periods without fatiguing.
{: #fs-id2296979}

The proportion of SO muscle fibers in muscle determines the suitability
of that muscle for endurance, and may benefit those participating in
endurance activities. Postural muscles have a large number of SO fibers
and relatively few FO and FG fibers, to keep the back straight
([\[link\]](#fig-ch10_06_01){: .autogenerated-content}). Endurance
athletes, like marathon-runners also would benefit from a larger
proportion of SO fibers, but it is unclear if the most-successful
marathoners are those with naturally high numbers of SO fibers, or
whether the most successful marathon runners develop high numbers of SO
fibers with repetitive training. Endurance training can result in
overuse injuries such as stress fractures and joint and tendon
inflammation.
{: #fs-id1699845}

<figure id="fig-ch10_06_01">
<div data-type="title">
Marathoners
</div>
<figcaption>
Long-distance runners have a large number of SO fibers and relatively
few FO and FG fibers. (credit: “Tseo2”/Wikimedia Commons)
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1645648" data-alt="This photograph
shows some runners in a race."> ![This photograph shows some runners in
a race.](../resources/1026_Marathoners.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="380"} </span>
</figure>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2250448" markdown="1">
# Resistance Exercise
{: data-type="title"}

Resistance exercises, as opposed to endurance exercise, require large
amounts of FG fibers to produce short, powerful movements that are not
repeated over long periods. The high rates of ATP hydrolysis and
cross-bridge formation in FG fibers result in powerful muscle
contractions. Muscles used for power have a higher ratio of FG to SO/FO
fibers, and trained athletes possess even higher levels of FG fibers in
their muscles. Resistance exercise affects muscles by increasing the
formation of myofibrils, thereby increasing the thickness of muscle
fibers. This added structure causes hypertrophy, or the enlargement of
muscles, exemplified by the large skeletal muscles seen in body builders
and other athletes ([\[link\]](#fig-ch10_06_02){:
.autogenerated-content}). Because this muscular enlargement is achieved
by the addition of structural proteins, athletes trying to build muscle
mass often ingest large amounts of protein.
{: #fs-id2264056}

<figure id="fig-ch10_06_02">
<div data-type="title">
Hypertrophy
</div>
<figcaption>
Body builders have a large number of FG fibers and relatively few FO and
SO fibers. (credit: Lin Mei/flickr)
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2346780" data-alt="This photograph
shows a man flexing his muscles."> ![This photograph shows a man flexing
his muscles.](../resources/1027_Hypertrophy.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="350"} </span>
</figure>
Except for the hypertrophy that follows an increase in the number of
sarcomeres and myofibrils in a skeletal muscle, the cellular changes
observed during endurance training do not usually occur with resistance
training. There is usually no significant increase in mitochondria or
capillary density. However, resistance training does increase the
development of connective tissue, which adds to the overall mass of the
muscle and helps to contain muscles as they produce increasingly
powerful contractions. Tendons also become stronger to prevent tendon
damage, as the force produced by muscles is transferred to tendons that
attach the muscle to bone.
{: #fs-id1849854}

For effective strength training, the intensity of the exercise must
continually be increased. For instance, continued weight lifting without
increasing the weight of the load does not increase muscle size. To
produce ever-greater results, the weights lifted must become
increasingly heavier, making it more difficult for muscles to move the
load. The muscle then adapts to this heavier load, and an even heavier
load must be used if even greater muscle mass is desired.
{: #fs-id1858356}

If done improperly, resistance training can lead to overuse injuries of
the muscle, tendon, or bone. These injuries can occur if the load is too
heavy or if the muscles are not given sufficient time between workouts
to recover or if joints are not aligned properly during the exercises.
Cellular damage to muscle fibers that occurs after intense exercise
includes damage to the sarcolemma and myofibrils. This muscle damage
contributes to the feeling of soreness after strenuous exercise, but
muscles gain mass as this damage is repaired, and additional structural
proteins are added to replace the damaged ones. Overworking skeletal
muscles can also lead to tendon damage and even skeletal damage if the
load is too great for the muscles to bear.
{: #fs-id2004940}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2278657" markdown="1">
# Performance-Enhancing Substances
{: data-type="title"}

Some athletes attempt to boost their performance by using various agents
that may enhance muscle performance. Anabolic steroids are one of the
more widely known agents used to boost muscle mass and increase power
output. Anabolic steroids are a form of testosterone, a male sex hormone
that stimulates muscle formation, leading to increased muscle mass.
{: #fs-id2030648}

Endurance athletes may also try to boost the availability of oxygen to
muscles to increase aerobic respiration by using substances such as
erythropoietin (EPO), a hormone normally produced in the kidneys, which
triggers the production of red blood cells. The extra oxygen carried by
these blood cells can then be used by muscles for aerobic respiration.
Human growth hormone (hGH) is another supplement, and although it can
facilitate building muscle mass, its main role is to promote the healing
of muscle and other tissues after strenuous exercise. Increased hGH may
allow for faster recovery after muscle damage, reducing the rest
required after exercise, and allowing for more sustained high-level
performance.
{: #fs-id1216986}

Although performance-enhancing substances often do improve performance,
most are banned by governing bodies in sports and are illegal for
nonmedical purposes. Their use to enhance performance raises ethical
issues of cheating because they give users an unfair advantage over
nonusers. A greater concern, however, is that their use carries serious
health risks. The side effects of these substances are often
significant, nonreversible, and in some cases fatal. The physiological
strain caused by these substances is often greater than what the body
can handle, leading to effects that are unpredictable and dangerous.
Anabolic steroid use has been linked to infertility, aggressive
behavior, cardiovascular disease, and brain cancer.
{: #fs-id2110999}

Similarly, some athletes have used creatine to increase power output.
Creatine phosphate provides quick bursts of ATP to muscles in the
initial stages of contraction. Increasing the amount of creatine
available to cells is thought to produce more ATP and therefore increase
explosive power output, although its effectiveness as a supplement has
been questioned.
{: #fs-id2240374}

<div data-type="note" id="fs-id1253907" class="anatomy everyday" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Everyday Connection
</div>
<span data-type="title">Aging and Muscle Tissue</span> Although atrophy
due to disuse can often be reversed with exercise, muscle atrophy with
age, referred to as sarcopenia, is irreversible. This is a primary
reason why even highly trained athletes succumb to declining performance
with age. This decline is noticeable in athletes whose sports require
strength and powerful movements, such as sprinting, whereas the effects
of age are less noticeable in endurance athletes such as marathon
runners or long-distance cyclists. As muscles age, muscle fibers die,
and they are replaced by connective tissue and adipose tissue
([\[link\]](#fig-ch10_06_03){: .autogenerated-content}). Because those
tissues cannot contract and generate force as muscle can, muscles lose
the ability to produce powerful contractions. The decline in muscle mass
causes a loss of strength, including the strength required for posture
and mobility. This may be caused by a reduction in FG fibers that
hydrolyze ATP quickly to produce short, powerful contractions. Muscles
in older people sometimes possess greater numbers of SO fibers, which
are responsible for longer contractions and do not produce powerful
movements. There may also be a reduction in the size of motor units,
resulting in fewer fibers being stimulated and less muscle tension being
produced.
{: #fs-id2267886}

<figure id="fig-ch10_06_03">
<div data-type="title">
Atrophy
</div>
<figcaption>
Muscle mass is reduced as muscles atrophy with disuse.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1761009" data-alt="This image shows
muscle atrophy. The left panel shows normal muscle and the right panel
shows atrophied muscle."> ![This image shows muscle atrophy. The left
panel shows normal muscle and the right panel shows atrophied
muscle.](../resources/1025_Atrophy.png){: data-media-type="image/jpg"
width="325"} </span>
</figure>
Sarcopenia can be delayed to some extent by exercise, as training adds
structural proteins and causes cellular changes that can offset the
effects of atrophy. Increased exercise can produce greater numbers of
cellular mitochondria, increase capillary density, and increase the mass
and strength of connective tissue. The effects of age-related atrophy
are especially pronounced in people who are sedentary, as the loss of
muscle cells is displayed as functional impairments such as trouble with
locomotion, balance, and posture. This can lead to a decrease in quality
of life and medical problems, such as joint problems because the muscles
that stabilize bones and joints are weakened. Problems with locomotion
and balance can also cause various injuries due to falls.
{: #fs-id1425445}

</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1335845" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

Hypertrophy is an increase in muscle mass due to the addition of
structural proteins. The opposite of hypertrophy is atrophy, the loss of
muscle mass due to the breakdown of structural proteins. Endurance
exercise causes an increase in cellular mitochondria, myoglobin, and
capillary networks in SO fibers. Endurance athletes have a high level of
SO fibers relative to the other fiber types. Resistance exercise causes
hypertrophy. Power-producing muscles have a higher number of FG fibers
than of slow fibers. Strenuous exercise causes muscle cell damage that
requires time to heal. Some athletes use performance-enhancing
substances to enhance muscle performance. Muscle atrophy due to age is
called sarcopenia and occurs as muscle fibers die and are replaced by
connective and adipose tissue.
{: #fs-id1880898}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1766146" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2305580">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2292226" markdown="1">
The muscles of a professional sprinter are most likely to have ________.
{: #fs-id2072676}

1.  80 percent fast-twitch muscle fibers and 20 percent slow-twitch
    muscle fibers
2.  20 percent fast-twitch muscle fibers and 80 percent slow-twitch
    muscle fibers
3.  50 percent fast-twitch muscle fibers and 50 percent slow-twitch
    muscle fibers
4.  40 percent fast-twitch muscle fibers and 60 percent slow-twitch
    muscle fibers
{: #fs-id1644876 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2156249" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id2296900}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2165423">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1616427" markdown="1">
The muscles of a professional marathon runner are most likely to have
________.
{: #fs-id1384135}

1.  80 percent fast-twitch muscle fibers and 20 percent slow-twitch
    muscle fibers
2.  20 percent fast-twitch muscle fibers and 80 percent slow-twitch
    muscle fibers
3.  50 percent fast-twitch muscle fibers and 50 percent slow-twitch
    muscle fibers
4.  40 percent fast-twitch muscle fibers and 60 percent slow-twitch
    muscle fibers
{: #fs-id2147278 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1323010" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id2101753}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1285054">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1971404" markdown="1">
Which of the following statements is *true*{: data-effect="italics"}?
{: #fs-id1408130}

1.  Fast fibers have a small diameter.
2.  Fast fibers contain loosely packed myofibrils.
3.  Fast fibers have large glycogen reserves.
4.  Fast fibers have many mitochondria.
{: #fs-id1838530 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1279095" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id2094305}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1637254">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2277245" markdown="1">
Which of the following statements is *false*{: data-effect="italics"}?
{: #fs-id823463}

1.  Slow fibers have a small network of capillaries.
2.  Slow fibers contain the pigment myoglobin.
3.  Slow fibers contain a large number of mitochondria.
4.  Slow fibers contract for extended periods.
{: #fs-id1361004 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2270740" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id1356790}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1241191" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1211287">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2052739" markdown="1">
What changes occur at the cellular level in response to endurance
training?
{: #fs-id1751953}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2070049" data-label="" markdown="1">
Endurance training modifies slow fibers to make them more efficient by
producing more mitochondria to enable more aerobic metabolism and more
ATP production. Endurance exercise can also increase the amount of
myoglobin in a cell and formation of more extensive capillary networks
around the fiber.
{: #fs-id2292028}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2337391">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2020315" markdown="1">
What changes occur at the cellular level in response to resistance
training?
{: #fs-id2338234}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1474184" data-label="" markdown="1">
Resistance exercises affect muscles by causing the formation of more
actin and myosin, increasing the structure of muscle fibers.
{: #fs-id1699664}

</div>
</div>
</section>



