---
title: Introduction
layout: page
---

<?cnx.eoc
  class="summary" title="Chapter Review"?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="interactive-exercise" title="Interactive Link Questions"?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="multiple-choice" title="Review Questions" ?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="free-response" title="Critical Thinking Questions"?>

<figure id="fig-ch10_00_01" class="splash">
<div data-type="title">
Tennis Player
</div>
<figcaption>
Athletes rely on toned skeletal muscles to supply the force required for
movement. (credit: Emmanuel Huybrechts/flickr)
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2230218" data-alt="This photograph
shows a man playing tennis."> ![This photograph shows a man playing
tennis.](../resources/1000_Tennis_Player.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="600"} </span>
</figure>
<div data-type="note" id="eip-275" class="chapter-objectives" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Chapter Objectives
</div>
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
{: #eip-id5069169}

* Explain the organization of muscle tissue
* Describe the function and structure of skeletal, cardiac muscle, and
  smooth muscle
* Explain how muscles work with tendons to move the body
* Describe how muscles contract and relax
* Define the process of muscle metabolism
* Explain how the nervous system controls muscle tension
* Relate the connections between exercise and muscle performance
* Explain the development and regeneration of muscle tissue
{: #eip-id1165744650424}

</div>
When most people think of muscles, they think of the muscles that are
visible just under the skin, particularly of the limbs. These are
skeletal muscles, so-named because most of them move the skeleton. But
there are two other types of muscle in the body, with distinctly
different jobs. Cardiac muscle, found in the heart, is concerned with
pumping blood through the circulatory system. Smooth muscle is concerned
with various involuntary movements, such as having one’s hair stand on
end when cold or frightened, or moving food through the digestive
system. This chapter will examine the structure and function of these
three types of muscles.
{: #fs-id1574141}




