---
title: Development of the Male and Female Reproductive Systems
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Explain how bipotential tissues are directed to develop into male or
  female sex organs
* Name the rudimentary duct systems in the embryo that are precursors to
  male or female internal sex organs
* Describe the hormonal changes that bring about puberty, and the
  secondary sex characteristics of men and women

</div>
The development of the reproductive systems begins soon after
fertilization of the egg, with primordial gonads beginning to develop
approximately one month after conception. Reproductive development
continues in utero, but there is little change in the reproductive
system between infancy and puberty.
{: #fs-id2566861}

<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2327634" markdown="1">
# Development of the Sexual Organs in the Embryo and Fetus
{: data-type="title"}

Females are considered the “fundamental” sex—that is, without much
chemical prompting, all fertilized eggs would develop into females. To
become a male, an individual must be exposed to the cascade of factors
initiated by a single gene on the male Y chromosome. This is called the
SRY (*S*{: data-effect="italics"}ex-determining *R*{:
data-effect="italics"}egion of the *Y*{: data-effect="italics"}
chromosome). Because females do not have a Y chromosome, they do not
have the *SRY*{: data-effect="italics"} gene. Without a functional
*SRY*{: data-effect="italics"} gene, an individual will be female.
{: #fs-id2123649}

In both male and female embryos, the same group of cells has the
potential to develop into either the male or female gonads; this tissue
is considered bipotential. The *SRY*{: data-effect="italics"} gene
actively recruits other genes that begin to develop the testes, and
suppresses genes that are important in female development. As part of
this *SRY*{: data-effect="italics"}-prompted cascade, germ cells in the
bipotential gonads differentiate into spermatogonia. Without *SRY*{:
data-effect="italics"}, different genes are expressed, oogonia form, and
primordial follicles develop in the primitive ovary.
{: #fs-id2780689}

Soon after the formation of the testis, the Leydig cells begin to
secrete testosterone. Testosterone can influence tissues that are
bipotential to become male reproductive structures. For example, with
exposure to testosterone, cells that could become either the glans penis
or the glans clitoris form the glans penis. Without testosterone, these
same cells differentiate into the clitoris.
{: #fs-id2763275}

Not all tissues in the reproductive tract are bipotential. The internal
reproductive structures (for example the uterus, uterine tubes, and part
of the vagina in females; and the epididymis, ductus deferens, and
seminal vesicles in males) form from one of two rudimentary duct systems
in the embryo. For proper reproductive function in the adult, one set of
these ducts must develop properly, and the other must degrade. In males,
secretions from sustentacular cells trigger a degradation of the female
duct, called the <span data-type="term">Müllerian duct</span>. At the
same time, testosterone secretion stimulates growth of the male tract,
the <span data-type="term">Wolffian duct</span>. Without such
sustentacular cell secretion, the Müllerian duct will develop; without
testosterone, the Wolffian duct will degrade. Thus, the developing
offspring will be female. For more information and a figure of
differentiation of the gonads, seek additional content on fetal
development.
{: #fs-id2764705}

<div data-type="note" id="fs-id1586956" class="anatomy interactive" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Interactive Link Feature
</div>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="eip-id2160379" data-alt="QR Code
representing a URL"> ![QR Code representing a
URL](../resources/fetus.png){: data-media-type="image/png" width="130"}
</span>
A baby’s gender is determined at conception, and the different genitalia
of male and female fetuses develop from the same tissues in the embryo.
View this [ <u data-effect="underline">animation</u>

][1] to see a comparison of the development of structures of the female
and male reproductive systems in a growing fetus. Where are the testes
located for most of gestational time?
{: #fs-id2761972}

</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2417723" markdown="1">
# Further Sexual Development Occurs at Puberty
{: data-type="title"}

<span data-type="term">Puberty</span> is the stage of development at
which individuals become sexually mature. Though the outcomes of puberty
for boys and girls are very different, the hormonal control of the
process is very similar. In addition, though the timing of these events
varies between individuals, the sequence of changes that occur is
predictable for male and female adolescents. As shown in
[\[link\]](#fig-ch28_03_01){: .autogenerated-content}, a concerted
release of hormones from the hypothalamus (GnRH), the anterior pituitary
(LH and FSH), and the gonads (either testosterone or estrogen) is
responsible for the maturation of the reproductive systems and the
development of <span data-type="term">secondary sex
characteristics</span>, which are physical changes that serve auxiliary
roles in reproduction.
{: #fs-id2173379}

The first changes begin around the age of eight or nine when the
production of LH becomes detectable. The release of LH occurs primarily
at night during sleep and precedes the physical changes of puberty by
several years. In pre-pubertal children, the sensitivity of the negative
feedback system in the hypothalamus and pituitary is very high. This
means that very low concentrations of androgens or estrogens will
negatively feed back onto the hypothalamus and pituitary, keeping the
production of GnRH, LH, and FSH low.
{: #fs-id2523382}

As an individual approaches puberty, two changes in sensitivity occur.
The first is a decrease of sensitivity in the hypothalamus and pituitary
to negative feedback, meaning that it takes increasingly larger
concentrations of sex steroid hormones to stop the production of LH and
FSH. The second change in sensitivity is an increase in sensitivity of
the gonads to the FSH and LH signals, meaning the gonads of adults are
more responsive to gonadotropins than are the gonads of children. As a
result of these two changes, the levels of LH and FSH slowly increase
and lead to the enlargement and maturation of the gonads, which in turn
leads to secretion of higher levels of sex hormones and the initiation
of spermatogenesis and folliculogenesis.
{: #fs-id2588698}

In addition to age, multiple factors can affect the age of onset of
puberty, including genetics, environment, and psychological stress. One
of the more important influences may be nutrition; historical data
demonstrate the effect of better and more consistent nutrition on the
age of menarche in girls in the United States, which decreased from an
average age of approximately 17 years of age in 1860 to the current age
of approximately 12.75 years in 1960, as it remains today. Some studies
indicate a link between puberty onset and the amount of stored fat in an
individual. This effect is more pronounced in girls, but has been
documented in both sexes. Body fat, corresponding with secretion of the
hormone leptin by adipose cells, appears to have a strong role in
determining menarche. This may reflect to some extent the high metabolic
costs of gestation and lactation. In girls who are lean and highly
active, such as gymnasts, there is often a delay in the onset of
puberty.
{: #fs-id2184717}

<figure id="fig-ch28_03_01">
<div data-type="title">
Hormones of Puberty
</div>
<figcaption>
During puberty, the release of LH and FSH from the anterior pituitary
stimulates the gonads to produce sex hormones in both male and female
adolescents.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1530793" data-alt="This flow chart
shows the different hormones and the organs they act on at the onset of
puberty. The hypothalamus is shown on top. The right half of the
flowchart shows the hormones in females and the left half shows the
hormones in males."> ![This flow chart shows the different hormones and
the organs they act on at the onset of puberty. The hypothalamus is
shown on top. The right half of the flowchart shows the hormones in
females and the left half shows the hormones in
males.](../resources/Figure_28_03_01.jpg){: data-media-type="image/jpg"
width="550"} </span>
</figure>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id2080258" markdown="1">
## Signs of Puberty
{: data-type="title"}

Different sex steroid hormone concentrations between the sexes also
contribute to the development and function of secondary sexual
characteristics. Examples of secondary sexual characteristics are listed
in [\[link\]](#development_of_the_secondary_sexual_characteristics){:
.autogenerated-content}.
{: #fs-id2319008}

<table id="development_of_the_secondary_sexual_characteristics" summary="The first column lists Male Development of the Secondary Sexual Characteristics and the second column lists Female Development of the Secondary Sexual Characteristics."><thead> <tr> <th colspan="2">Development of the Secondary Sexual Characteristics</th> </tr> <tr> <th>Male</th> <th>Female</th> </tr> </thead><tbody> <tr> <td>Increased larynx size and deepening of the voice</td> <td>Deposition of fat, predominantly in breasts and hips </td> </tr> <tr> <td>Increased muscular development </td> <td>Breast development</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Growth of facial, axillary, and pubic hair, and increased growth of body hair </td> <td>Broadening of the pelvis and growth of axillary and pubic hair</td> </tr> </tbody></table>
As a girl reaches puberty, typically the first change that is visible is
the development of the breast tissue. This is followed by the growth of
axillary and pubic hair. A growth spurt normally starts at approximately
age 9 to 11, and may last two years or more. During this time, a girl’s
height can increase 3 inches a year. The next step in puberty is
menarche, the start of menstruation.
{: #fs-id2395971}

In boys, the growth of the testes is typically the first physical sign
of the beginning of puberty, which is followed by growth and
pigmentation of the scrotum and growth of the penis. The next step is
the growth of hair, including armpit, pubic, chest, and facial hair.
Testosterone stimulates the growth of the larynx and thickening and
lengthening of the vocal folds, which causes the voice to drop in pitch.
The first fertile ejaculations typically appear at approximately 15
years of age, but this age can vary widely across individual boys.
Unlike the early growth spurt observed in females, the male growth spurt
occurs toward the end of puberty, at approximately age 11 to 13, and a
boy’s height can increase as much as 4 inches a year. In some males,
pubertal development can continue through the early 20s.
{: #fs-id2175127}

</section>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2567116" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Section Summary
{: data-type="title"}

The reproductive systems of males and females begin to develop soon
after conception. A gene on the male’s Y chromosome called *SRY*{:
data-effect="italics"} is critical in stimulating a cascade of events
that simultaneously stimulate testis development and repress the
development of female structures. Testosterone produced by Leydig cells
in the embryonic testis stimulates the development of male sexual
organs. If testosterone is not present, female sexual organs will
develop.
{: #fs-id2575757}

Whereas the gonads and some other reproductive tissues are considered
bipotential, the tissue that forms the internal reproductive structures
stems from ducts that will develop into only male (Wolffian) or female
(Müllerian) structures. To be able to reproduce as an adult, one of
these systems must develop properly and the other must degrade.
{: #fs-id2463231}

Further development of the reproductive systems occurs at puberty. The
initiation of the changes that occur in puberty is the result of a
decrease in sensitivity to negative feedback in the hypothalamus and
pituitary gland, and an increase in sensitivity of the gonads to FSH and
LH stimulation. These changes lead to increases in either estrogen or
testosterone, in female and male adolescents, respectively. The increase
in sex steroid hormones leads to maturation of the gonads and other
reproductive organs. The initiation of spermatogenesis begins in boys,
and girls begin ovulating and menstruating. Increases in sex steroid
hormones also lead to the development of secondary sex characteristics
such as breast development in girls and facial hair and larynx growth in
boys.
{: #fs-id2263000}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2603304" class="interactive-exercise" markdown="1">
# Interactive Link Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2272193">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2363306" markdown="1">
A baby’s gender is determined at conception, and the different genitalia
of male and female fetuses develop from the same tissues in the embryo.
View this [ <u data-effect="underline">animation</u>

][1] that compares the development of structures of the female and male
reproductive systems in a growing fetus. Where are the testes located
for most of gestational time?
{: #fs-id2144939}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2357969" markdown="1">
The testes are located in the abdomen.
{: #fs-id2568545}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2723850" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2395985">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2137328" markdown="1">
What controls whether an embryo will develop testes or ovaries?
{: #fs-id1856586}

1.  pituitary gland
2.  hypothalamus
3.  Y chromosome
4.  presence or absence of estrogen
{: #fs-id1721414 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2472347" markdown="1">
c
{: #fs-id1517372}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1576900">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1856183" markdown="1">
Without *SRY*{: data-effect="italics"} expression, an embryo will
develop ________.
{: #fs-id1571361}

1.  male reproductive structures
2.  female reproductive structures
3.  no reproductive structures
4.  male reproductive structures 50 percent of the time and female
    reproductive structures 50 percent of the time
{: #fs-id2678188 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1547423" markdown="1">
b
{: #fs-id2793997}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2633194">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2279173" markdown="1">
The timing of puberty can be influenced by which of the following?
{: #fs-id2586886}

1.  genes
2.  stress
3.  amount of body fat
4.  all of the above
{: #fs-id2711813 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2108376" markdown="1">
d
{: #fs-id1983374}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2864061" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1954220">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1469266" markdown="1">
Identify the changes in sensitivity that occur in the hypothalamus,
pituitary, and gonads as a boy or girl approaches puberty. Explain how
these changes lead to the increases of sex steroid hormone secretions
that drive many pubertal changes.
{: #fs-id2054289}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2480197" markdown="1">
As an individual approaches puberty, two changes in sensitivity occur.
The first is a decrease of sensitivity in the hypothalamus and pituitary
to negative feedback, meaning that it takes increasingly larger
concentrations of sex steroid hormones to stop the production of LH and
FSH. The second change in sensitivity is an increase in the sensitivity
of the gonads to the FSH and LH signals, meaning that the gonads of
adults are more responsive to gonadotropins than are the gonads of
children. As a result of these two changes, the levels of LH and FSH
slowly increase and lead to the enlargement and maturation of the
gonads, which in turn leads to secretion of higher levels of sex
hormones and the initiation of spermatogenesis and folliculogenesis.
{: #fs-id2034029}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2589761">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2662746" markdown="1">
Explain how the internal female and male reproductive structures develop
from two different duct systems.
{: #fs-id2531779}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2655248" markdown="1">
The internal reproductive structures form from one of two rudimentary
duct systems in the embryo. Testosterone secretion stimulates growth of
the male tract, the Wolffian duct. Secretions of sustentacular cells
trigger a degradation of the female tract, the Müllerian duct. Without
these stimuli, the Müllerian duct will develop and the Wolffian duct
will degrade, resulting in a female embryo.
{: #fs-id2927115}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2981645">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2174830" markdown="1">
Explain what would occur during fetal development to an XY individual
with a mutation causing a nonfunctional *SRY*{: data-effect="italics"}
gene.
{: #fs-id1960422}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2493510" markdown="1">
If the *SRY*{: data-effect="italics"} gene were not functional, the XY
individual would be genetically a male, but would develop female
reproductive structures.
{: #fs-id2347058}

</div>
</div>
</section>




[1]: http://openstaxcollege.org/l/fetus

