---
title: Water Balance
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Explain how water levels in the body influence the thirst cycle
* Identify the main route by which water leaves the body
* Describe the role of ADH and its effect on body water levels
* Define dehydration and identify common causes of dehydration

</div>
On a typical day, the average adult will take in about 2500 mL (almost 3
quarts) of aqueous fluids. Although most of the intake comes through the
digestive tract, about 230 mL (8 ounces) per day is generated
metabolically, in the last steps of aerobic respiration. Additionally,
each day about the same volume (2500 mL) of water leaves the body by
different routes; most of this lost water is removed as urine. The
kidneys also can adjust blood volume though mechanisms that draw water
out of the filtrate and urine. The kidneys can regulate water levels in
the body; they conserve water if you are dehydrated, and they can make
urine more dilute to expel excess water if necessary. Water is lost
through the skin through evaporation from the skin surface without overt
sweating and from air expelled from the lungs. This type of water loss
is called insensible water loss because a person is usually unaware of
it.
{: #fs-id1909687}

<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2059473" markdown="1">
# Regulation of Water Intake
{: data-type="title"}

Osmolality is the ratio of solutes in a solution to a volume of solvent
in a solution. <span data-type="term">Plasma osmolality</span> is thus
the ratio of solutes to water in blood plasma. A person’s plasma
osmolality value reflects his or her state of hydration. A healthy body
maintains plasma osmolality within a narrow range, by employing several
mechanisms that regulate both water intake and output.
{: #fs-id2030872}

Drinking water is considered voluntary. So how is water intake regulated
by the body? Consider someone who is experiencing <span
data-type="term">dehydration</span>, a net loss of water that results in
insufficient water in blood and other tissues. The water that leaves the
body, as exhaled air, sweat, or urine, is ultimately extracted from
blood plasma. As the blood becomes more concentrated, the thirst
response—a sequence of physiological processes—is triggered
([\[link\]](#fig-ch27_02_01){: .autogenerated-content}). Osmoreceptors
are sensory receptors in the thirst center in the hypothalamus that
monitor the concentration of solutes (osmolality) of the blood. If blood
osmolality increases above its ideal value, the hypothalamus transmits
signals that result in a conscious awareness of thirst. The person
should (and normally does) respond by drinking water. The hypothalamus
of a dehydrated person also releases antidiuretic hormone (ADH) through
the posterior pituitary gland. ADH signals the kidneys to recover water
from urine, effectively diluting the blood plasma. To conserve water,
the hypothalamus of a dehydrated person also sends signals via the
sympathetic nervous system to the salivary glands in the mouth. The
signals result in a decrease in watery, serous output (and an increase
in stickier, thicker mucus output). These changes in secretions result
in a “dry mouth” and the sensation of thirst.
{: #fs-id2021199}

<figure id="fig-ch27_02_01">
<div data-type="title">
A Flowchart Showing the Thirst Response
</div>
<figcaption>
The thirst response begins when osmoreceptors detect a decrease in water
levels in the blood.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1616324" data-alt="This figure is a
top-to bottom flowchart describing the thirst response. The topmost box
of the chart states that there is insufficient water in the body, which
has two effects. The left branch of the chart leads to decreased blood
volume, which leads to decreased blood pressure. This triggers an
increase in angiotensin two. Angiotensin two stimulates the thirst
center in the hypothalamus. On the right branch, insufficient water in
the body leads to increased blood osmolality, which causes dry mouth.
Increased blood osmolality and dry mouth is sensed by osmoreceptors in
the hypothalamus. This stimulates the thirst center in the hypothalamus
to increase thirst, giving a person the urge to drink. Drinking
decreases blood osmolality back to homeostatic levels."> ![This figure
is a top-to bottom flowchart describing the thirst response. The topmost
box of the chart states that there is insufficient water in the body,
which has two effects. The left branch of the chart leads to decreased
blood volume, which leads to decreased blood pressure. This triggers an
increase in angiotensin two. Angiotensin two stimulates the thirst
center in the hypothalamus. On the right branch, insufficient water in
the body leads to increased blood osmolality, which causes dry mouth.
Increased blood osmolality and dry mouth is sensed by osmoreceptors in
the hypothalamus. This stimulates the thirst center in the hypothalamus
to increase thirst, giving a person the urge to drink. Drinking
decreases blood osmolality back to homeostatic
levels.](../resources/2708_Flowchart_of_Thirst_Response-01.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="380"} </span>
</figure>
Decreased blood volume resulting from water loss has two additional
effects. First, baroreceptors, blood-pressure receptors in the arch of
the aorta and the carotid arteries in the neck, detect a decrease in
blood pressure that results from decreased blood volume. The heart is
ultimately signaled to increase its rate and/or strength of contractions
to compensate for the lowered blood pressure.
{: #fs-id1398230}

Second, the kidneys have a renin-angiotensin hormonal system that
increases the production of the active form of the hormone angiotensin
II, which helps stimulate thirst, but also stimulates the release of the
hormone aldosterone from the adrenal glands. Aldosterone increases the
reabsorption of sodium in the distal tubules of the nephrons in the
kidneys, and water follows this reabsorbed sodium back into the blood.
{: #fs-id892029}

If adequate fluids are not consumed, dehydration results and a person’s
body contains too little water to function correctly. A person who
repeatedly vomits or who has diarrhea may become dehydrated, and
infants, because their body mass is so low, can become dangerously
dehydrated very quickly. Endurance athletes such as distance runners
often become dehydrated during long races. Dehydration can be a medical
emergency, and a dehydrated person may lose consciousness, become
comatose, or die, if his or her body is not rehydrated quickly.
{: #fs-id1321995}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1380925" markdown="1">
# Regulation of Water Output
{: data-type="title"}

Water loss from the body occurs predominantly through the renal system.
A person produces an average of 1.5 liters (1.6 quarts) of urine per
day. Although the volume of urine varies in response to hydration
levels, there is a minimum volume of urine production required for
proper bodily functions. The kidney excretes 100 to 1200 milliosmoles of
solutes per day to rid the body of a variety of excess salts and other
water-soluble chemical wastes, most notably creatinine, urea, and uric
acid. Failure to produce the minimum volume of urine means that
metabolic wastes cannot be effectively removed from the body, a
situation that can impair organ function. The minimum level of urine
production necessary to maintain normal function is about 0.47 liters
(0.5 quarts) per day.
{: #fs-id1207337}

The kidneys also must make adjustments in the event of ingestion of too
much fluid. <span data-type="term">Diuresis</span>, which is the
production of urine in excess of normal levels, begins about 30 minutes
after drinking a large quantity of fluid. Diuresis reaches a peak after
about 1 hour, and normal urine production is reestablished after about 3
hours.
{: #fs-id2059359}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1645762" markdown="1">
# Role of ADH
{: data-type="title"}

<span data-type="term">Antidiuretic hormone (ADH)</span>, also known as
vasopressin, controls the amount of water reabsorbed from the collecting
ducts and tubules in the kidney. This hormone is produced in the
hypothalamus and is delivered to the posterior pituitary for storage and
release ([\[link\]](#fig-ch27_02_02){: .autogenerated-content}). When
the osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus detect an increase in the
concentration of blood plasma, the hypothalamus signals the release of
ADH from the posterior pituitary into the blood.
{: #fs-id1697734}

<figure id="fig-ch27_02_02">
<div data-type="title">
Antidiuretic Hormone (ADH)
</div>
<figcaption>
ADH is produced in the hypothalamus and released by the posterior
pituitary gland. It causes the kidneys to retain water, constricts
arterioles in the peripheral circulation, and affects some social
behaviors in mammals.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1297066" data-alt="This set of diagrams
shows the effects of ADH on various structures within the body. In the
brain, ADH affects the cerebrum by influencing social behavior in some
mammals. ADH is also produced in the brain by the hypothalamus and
released in the posterior pituitary. ADH also constricts arterioles in
the body, which are the small arteries that enter into capillary beds.
Finally, a kidney is shown because ADH increases the reabsorption of
water in the kidneys."> ![This set of diagrams shows the effects of ADH
on various structures within the body. In the brain, ADH affects the
cerebrum by influencing social behavior in some mammals. ADH is also
produced in the brain by the hypothalamus and released in the posterior
pituitary. ADH also constricts arterioles in the body, which are the
small arteries that enter into capillary beds. Finally, a kidney is
shown because ADH increases the reabsorption of water in the
kidneys.](../resources/2709_ADH.jpg){: data-media-type="image/jpg"
width="450"} </span>
</figure>
ADH has two major effects. It constricts the arterioles in the
peripheral circulation, which reduces the flow of blood to the
extremities and thereby increases the blood supply to the core of the
body. ADH also causes the epithelial cells that line the renal
collecting tubules to move water channel proteins, called aquaporins,
from the interior of the cells to the apical surface, where these
proteins are inserted into the cell membrane
([\[link\]](#fig-ch27_02_03){: .autogenerated-content}). The result is
an increase in the water permeability of these cells and, thus, a large
increase in water passage from the urine through the walls of the
collecting tubules, leading to more reabsorption of water into the
bloodstream. When the blood plasma becomes less concentrated and the
level of ADH decreases, aquaporins are removed from collecting tubule
cell membranes, and the passage of water out of urine and into the blood
decreases.
{: #fs-id1850871}

<figure id="fig-ch27_02_03">
<div data-type="title">
Aquaporins
</div>
<figcaption>
The binding of ADH to receptors on the cells of the collecting tubule
results in aquaporins being inserted into the plasma membrane, shown in
the lower cell. This dramatically increases the flow of water out of the
tubule and into the bloodstream.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1886700" data-alt="This diagram depicts
a cross section of the right wall of a kidney collecting tubule. The
wall is composed of three block-shaped cells arranged vertically one on
top of each other. The lumen of the collecting tubule is to the left of
the three cells. Yellow-colored urine is flowing through the lumen.
There is a small strip of blue interstitial fluid to the right of the
three cells. To the right of the interstitial fluid is a cross section
of a blood vessel. Arrows show that water in the urine is entering the
left side of the wall cells through aquaporins. The water travels
through the cells and then leaves the kidney tubule through additional
aquaporins in the right side of the wall cells. The water travels
through the interstitial space and enters into the blood in the blood
vessel. The aquaporins in the wall cells are being released from
aquaporin storage vesicles within their cytoplasm."> ![This diagram
depicts a cross section of the right wall of a kidney collecting tubule.
The wall is composed of three block-shaped cells arranged vertically one
on top of each other. The lumen of the collecting tubule is to the left
of the three cells. Yellow-colored urine is flowing through the lumen.
There is a small strip of blue interstitial fluid to the right of the
three cells. To the right of the interstitial fluid is a cross section
of a blood vessel. Arrows show that water in the urine is entering the
left side of the wall cells through aquaporins. The water travels
through the cells and then leaves the kidney tubule through additional
aquaporins in the right side of the wall cells. The water travels
through the interstitial space and enters into the blood in the blood
vessel. The aquaporins in the wall cells are being released from
aquaporin storage vesicles within their
cytoplasm.](../resources/2710_Aquaporins-01.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="480"} </span>
</figure>
A diuretic is a compound that increases urine output and therefore
decreases water conservation by the body. Diuretics are used to treat
hypertension, congestive heart failure, and fluid retention associated
with menstruation. Alcohol acts as a diuretic by inhibiting the release
of ADH. Additionally, caffeine, when consumed in high concentrations,
acts as a diuretic.
{: #fs-id1355539}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1883294" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

Homeostasis requires that water intake and output be balanced. Most
water intake comes through the digestive tract via liquids and food, but
roughly 10 percent of water available to the body is generated at the
end of aerobic respiration during cellular metabolism. Urine produced by
the kidneys accounts for the largest amount of water leaving the body.
The kidneys can adjust the concentration of the urine to reflect the
body’s water needs, conserving water if the body is dehydrated or making
urine more dilute to expel excess water when necessary. ADH is a hormone
that helps the body to retain water by increasing water reabsorption by
the kidneys.
{: #fs-id1707644}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1470134" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1381947">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1616059" markdown="1">
The largest amount of water comes into the body via ________.
{: #fs-id1479052}

1.  metabolism
2.  foods
3.  liquids
4.  humidified air
{: #fs-id1723933 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1632998" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id1962177}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1968449">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1972309" markdown="1">
The largest amount of water leaves the body via ________.
{: #fs-id1469955}

1.  the GI tract
2.  the skin as sweat
3.  expiration
4.  urine
{: #fs-id1373472 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1489606" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id1905815}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1378888">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1412836" markdown="1">
Insensible water loss is water lost via ________.
{: #fs-id1417344}

1.  skin evaporation and in air from the lungs
2.  urine
3.  excessive sweating
4.  vomiting or diarrhea
{: #fs-id1949944 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2059648" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id1648747}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1946886">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1401343" markdown="1">
How soon after drinking a large glass of water will a person start
increasing their urine output?
{: #fs-id1405109}

1.  5 minutes
2.  30 minutes
3.  1 hour
4.  3 hours
{: #fs-id1388108 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1540198" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id1979580}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1541372" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1883204">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1907093" markdown="1">
Describe the effect of ADH on renal collecting tubules.
{: #fs-id1473380}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1972430" data-label="" markdown="1">
ADH constricts the arterioles in the peripheral circulation, limiting
blood to the extremities and increasing the blood supply to the core of
the body. ADH also causes the epithelial cells lining the renal
collecting tubules to move water channel proteins called aquaporins from
the sides of the cells to the apical surface. This greatly increases the
passage of water from the renal filtrate through the wall of the
collecting tubule as well as the reabsorption of water into the
bloodstream.
{: #fs-id1340253}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1836269">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2023849" markdown="1">
Why is it important for the amount of water intake to equal the amount
of water output?
{: #fs-id1649860}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1858015" data-label="" markdown="1">
Any imbalance of water entering or leaving the body will create an
osmotic imbalance that will adversely affect cell and tissue function.
{: #fs-id1493546}

</div>
</div>
</section>



