---
title: Overview of Muscle Tissues
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Describe the different types of muscle
* Explain contractibility and extensibility

</div>
Muscle is one of the four primary tissue types of the body, and the body
contains three types of muscle tissue: skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle,
and smooth muscle ([\[link\]](#fig-ch10_01_01){:
.autogenerated-content}). All three muscle tissues have some properties
in common; they all exhibit a quality called <span
data-type="term">excitability</span> as their plasma membranes can
change their electrical states (from polarized to depolarized) and send
an electrical wave called an action potential along the entire length of
the membrane. While the nervous system can influence the excitability of
cardiac and smooth muscle to some degree, skeletal muscle completely
depends on signaling from the nervous system to work properly. On the
other hand, both cardiac muscle and smooth muscle can respond to other
stimuli, such as hormones and local stimuli.
{: #fs-id1840923}

<figure id="fig-ch10_01_01">
<div data-type="title">
The Three Types of Muscle Tissue
</div>
<figcaption>
The body contains three types of muscle tissue: (a) skeletal muscle, (b)
smooth muscle, and (c) cardiac muscle. From top, LM × 1600, LM × 1600,
LM × 1600. (Micrographs provided by the Regents of University of
Michigan Medical School © 2012)
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1422382" data-alt="This figure show the
micrographs of skeletal muscle, smooth muscle, and cardiac muscle
cells."> ![This figure show the micrographs of skeletal muscle, smooth
muscle, and cardiac muscle
cells.](../resources/414_Skeletal_Smooth_Cardiac.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="320"} </span>
</figure>
The muscles all begin the actual process of contracting (shortening)
when a protein called actin is pulled by a protein called myosin. This
occurs in striated muscle (skeletal and cardiac) after specific binding
sites on the actin have been exposed in response to the interaction
between calcium ions (Ca<sup>++</sup>) and proteins (troponin and
tropomyosin) that “shield” the actin-binding sites. Ca<sup>++</sup> also
is required for the contraction of smooth muscle, although its role is
different: here Ca<sup>++</sup> activates enzymes, which in turn
activate myosin heads. All muscles require adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
to continue the process of contracting, and they all relax when the
Ca<sup>++</sup> is removed and the actin-binding sites are re-shielded.
{: #fs-id1388147}

A muscle can return to its original length when relaxed due to a quality
of muscle tissue called <span data-type="term">elasticity</span>. It can
recoil back to its original length due to elastic fibers. Muscle tissue
also has the quality of <span data-type="term">extensibility</span>; it
can stretch or extend. <span data-type="term">Contractility</span>
allows muscle tissue to pull on its attachment points and shorten with
force.
{: #fs-id2017239}

Differences among the three muscle types include the microscopic
organization of their contractile proteins—actin and myosin. The actin
and myosin proteins are arranged very regularly in the cytoplasm of
individual muscle cells (referred to as fibers) in both skeletal muscle
and cardiac muscle, which creates a pattern, or stripes, called
striations. The striations are visible with a light microscope under
high magnification (see [\[link\]](#fig-ch10_01_01){:
.autogenerated-content}). <span data-type="term">Skeletal muscle</span>
fibers are multinucleated structures that compose the skeletal muscle.
<span data-type="term">Cardiac muscle</span> fibers each have one to two
nuclei and are physically and electrically connected to each other so
that the entire heart contracts as one unit (called a syncytium).
{: #fs-id2020397}

Because the actin and myosin are not arranged in such regular fashion in
<span data-type="term">smooth muscle</span>, the cytoplasm of a smooth
muscle fiber (which has only a single nucleus) has a uniform,
nonstriated appearance (resulting in the name smooth muscle). However,
the less organized appearance of smooth muscle should not be interpreted
as less efficient. Smooth muscle in the walls of arteries is a critical
component that regulates blood pressure necessary to push blood through
the circulatory system; and smooth muscle in the skin, visceral organs,
and internal passageways is essential for moving all materials through
the body.
{: #fs-id2336777}

<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2169333" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

Muscle is the tissue in animals that allows for active movement of the
body or materials within the body. There are three types of muscle
tissue: skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle, and smooth muscle. Most of the
body’s skeletal muscle produces movement by acting on the skeleton.
Cardiac muscle is found in the wall of the heart and pumps blood through
the circulatory system.
{: #fs-id2097179}

Smooth muscle is found in the skin, where it is associated with hair
follicles; it also is found in the walls of internal organs, blood
vessels, and internal passageways, where it assists in moving materials.
{: #fs-id1616494}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1615929" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2025849">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1765369" markdown="1">
Muscle that has a striped appearance is described as being ________.
{: #fs-id1410225}

1.  elastic
2.  nonstriated
3.  excitable
4.  striated
{: #fs-id1574033 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2079816" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id1386433}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1604812">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2455630" markdown="1">
Which element is important in directly triggering contraction?
{: #fs-id1978247}

1.  sodium (Na<sup>+</sup>)
2.  calcium (Ca<sup>++</sup>)
3.  potassium (K<sup>+</sup>)
4.  chloride (Cl<sup>-</sup>)
{: #fs-id1273683 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1240626" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id2045368}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2168542">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1549316" markdown="1">
Which of the following properties is *not*{: data-effect="italics"}
common to all three muscle tissues?
{: #fs-id2152835}

1.  excitability
2.  the need for ATP
3.  at rest, uses shielding proteins to cover actin-binding sites
4.  elasticity
{: #fs-id1999380 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1194396" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id1939474}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2153740" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2277173">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1882963" markdown="1">
Why is elasticity an important quality of muscle tissue?
{: #fs-id1472063}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2036297" data-label="" markdown="1">
It allows muscle to return to its original length during relaxation
after contraction.
{: #fs-id2057788}

</div>
</div>
</section>



