---
title: Embryonic Development of the Respiratory System
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Create a timeline of the phases of respiratory development in the
  fetus
* Propose reasons for fetal breathing movements
* Explain how the lungs become inflated after birth

</div>
Development of the respiratory system begins early in the fetus. It is a
complex process that includes many structures, most of which arise from
the endoderm. Towards the end of development, the fetus can be observed
making breathing movements. Until birth, however, the mother provides
all of the oxygen to the fetus as well as removes all of the fetal
carbon dioxide via the placenta.
{: #fs-id2486303}

<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2279157" markdown="1">
# Time Line
{: data-type="title"}

The development of the respiratory system begins at about week 4 of
gestation. By week 28, enough alveoli have matured that a baby born
prematurely at this time can usually breathe on its own. The respiratory
system, however, is not fully developed until early childhood, when a
full complement of mature alveoli is present.
{: #fs-id2287234}

<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id2577774" markdown="1">
## Weeks 4–7
{: data-type="title"}

Respiratory development in the embryo begins around week 4. Ectodermal
tissue from the anterior head region invaginates posteriorly to form
olfactory pits, which fuse with endodermal tissue of the developing
pharynx. An <span data-type="term">olfactory pit</span> is one of a pair
of structures that will enlarge to become the nasal cavity. At about
this same time, the lung bud forms. The <span data-type="term">lung
bud</span> is a dome-shaped structure composed of tissue that bulges
from the foregut. The <span data-type="term">foregut</span> is endoderm
just inferior to the pharyngeal pouches. The <span
data-type="term">laryngotracheal bud</span> is a structure that forms
from the longitudinal extension of the lung bud as development
progresses. The portion of this structure nearest the pharynx becomes
the trachea, whereas the distal end becomes more bulbous, forming
bronchial buds. A <span data-type="term">bronchial bud</span> is one of
a pair of structures that will eventually become the bronchi and all
other lower respiratory structures ([\[link\]](#fig-ch23_07_01){:
.autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id2485319}

<figure id="fig-ch23_07_01">
<div data-type="title">
Development of the Lower Respiratory System
</div>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2875417" data-alt="This flowchart shows
the embryonic development of the respiratory system and correlates the
gestational age to the appearance of new features."> ![This flowchart
shows the embryonic development of the respiratory system and correlates
the gestational age to the appearance of new
features.](../resources/2328_Development_of_Lower_Respiratory_SystemN.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="440"} </span>
</figure>
</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1855525" markdown="1">
## Weeks 7–16
{: data-type="title"}

Bronchial buds continue to branch as development progresses until all of
the segmental bronchi have been formed. Beginning around week 13, the
lumens of the bronchi begin to expand in diameter. By week 16,
respiratory bronchioles form. The fetus now has all major lung
structures involved in the airway.
{: #fs-id2443755}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id2093821" markdown="1">
## Weeks 16–24
{: data-type="title"}

Once the respiratory bronchioles form, further development includes
extensive vascularization, or the development of the blood vessels, as
well as the formation of alveolar ducts and alveolar precursors. At
about week 19, the respiratory bronchioles have formed. In addition,
cells lining the respiratory structures begin to differentiate to form
type I and type II pneumocytes. Once type II cells have differentiated,
they begin to secrete small amounts of pulmonary surfactant. Around week
20, fetal breathing movements may begin.
{: #fs-id1977157}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1354664" markdown="1">
## Weeks 24–Term
{: data-type="title"}

Major growth and maturation of the respiratory system occurs from week
24 until term. More alveolar precursors develop, and larger amounts of
pulmonary surfactant are produced. Surfactant levels are not generally
adequate to create effective lung compliance until about the eighth
month of pregnancy. The respiratory system continues to expand, and the
surfaces that will form the respiratory membrane develop further. At
this point, pulmonary capillaries have formed and continue to expand,
creating a large surface area for gas exchange. The major milestone of
respiratory development occurs at around week 28, when sufficient
alveolar precursors have matured so that a baby born prematurely at this
time can usually breathe on its own. However, alveoli continue to
develop and mature into childhood. A full complement of functional
alveoli does not appear until around 8 years of age.
{: #fs-id1910265}

</section>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2487404" markdown="1">
# Fetal “Breathing”
{: data-type="title"}

Although the function of fetal breathing movements is not entirely
clear, they can be observed starting at 20–21 weeks of development.
Fetal breathing movements involve muscle contractions that cause the
inhalation of amniotic fluid and exhalation of the same fluid, with
pulmonary surfactant and mucus. Fetal breathing movements are not
continuous and may include periods of frequent movements and periods of
no movements. Maternal factors can influence the frequency of breathing
movements. For example, high blood glucose levels, called hyperglycemia,
can boost the number of breathing movements. Conversely, low blood
glucose levels, called hypoglycemia, can reduce the number of fetal
breathing movements. Tobacco use is also known to lower fetal breathing
rates. Fetal breathing may help tone the muscles in preparation for
breathing movements once the fetus is born. It may also help the alveoli
to form and mature. Fetal breathing movements are considered a sign of
robust health.
{: #fs-id1653002}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1576742" markdown="1">
# Birth
{: data-type="title"}

Prior to birth, the lungs are filled with amniotic fluid, mucus, and
surfactant. As the fetus is squeezed through the birth canal, the fetal
thoracic cavity is compressed, expelling much of this fluid. Some fluid
remains, however, but is rapidly absorbed by the body shortly after
birth. The first inhalation occurs within 10 seconds after birth and not
only serves as the first inspiration, but also acts to inflate the
lungs. Pulmonary surfactant is critical for inflation to occur, as it
reduces the surface tension of the alveoli. Preterm birth around 26
weeks frequently results in severe respiratory distress, although with
current medical advancements, some babies may survive. Prior to 26
weeks, sufficient pulmonary surfactant is not produced, and the surfaces
for gas exchange have not formed adequately; therefore, survival is low.
{: #fs-id2417127}

<div data-type="note" id="fs-id2838593" class="anatomy disorders" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Disorders of the…
</div>
<span data-type="title">Respiratory System: Respiratory Distress
Syndrome</span> Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) primarily occurs in
infants born prematurely. Up to 50 percent of infants born between 26
and 28 weeks and fewer than 30 percent of infants born between 30 and 31
weeks develop RDS. RDS results from insufficient production of pulmonary
surfactant, thereby preventing the lungs from properly inflating at
birth. A small amount of pulmonary surfactant is produced beginning at
around 20 weeks; however, this is not sufficient for inflation of the
lungs. As a result, dyspnea occurs and gas exchange cannot be performed
properly. Blood oxygen levels are low, whereas blood carbon dioxide
levels and pH are high.
{: #fs-id2518752}

The primary cause of RDS is premature birth, which may be due to a
variety of known or unknown causes. Other risk factors include
gestational diabetes, cesarean delivery, second-born twins, and family
history of RDS. The presence of RDS can lead to other serious disorders,
such as septicemia (infection of the blood) or pulmonary hemorrhage.
Therefore, it is important that RDS is immediately recognized and
treated to prevent death and reduce the risk of developing other
disorders.
{: #fs-id1908137}

Medical advances have resulted in an improved ability to treat RDS and
support the infant until proper lung development can occur. At the time
of delivery, treatment may include resuscitation and intubation if the
infant does not breathe on his or her own. These infants would need to
be placed on a ventilator to mechanically assist with the breathing
process. If spontaneous breathing occurs, application of nasal
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) may be required. In addition,
pulmonary surfactant is typically administered. Death due to RDS has
been reduced by 50 percent due to the introduction of pulmonary
surfactant therapy. Other therapies may include corticosteroids,
supplemental oxygen, and assisted ventilation. Supportive therapies,
such as temperature regulation, nutritional support, and antibiotics,
may be administered to the premature infant as well.
{: #fs-id1249708}

</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1632775" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

The development of the respiratory system in the fetus begins at about 4
weeks and continues into childhood. Ectodermal tissue in the anterior
portion of the head region invaginates posteriorly, forming olfactory
pits, which ultimately fuse with endodermal tissue of the early pharynx.
At about this same time, an protrusion of endodermal tissue extends
anteriorly from the foregut, producing a lung bud, which continues to
elongate until it forms the laryngotracheal bud. The proximal portion of
this structure will mature into the trachea, whereas the bulbous end
will branch to form two bronchial buds. These buds then branch
repeatedly, so that at about week 16, all major airway structures are
present. Development progresses after week 16 as respiratory bronchioles
and alveolar ducts form, and extensive vascularization occurs. Alveolar
type I cells also begin to take shape. Type II pulmonary cells develop
and begin to produce small amounts of surfactant. As the fetus grows,
the respiratory system continues to expand as more alveoli develop and
more surfactant is produced. Beginning at about week 36 and lasting into
childhood, alveolar precursors mature to become fully functional
alveoli. At birth, compression of the thoracic cavity forces much of the
fluid in the lungs to be expelled. The first inhalation inflates the
lungs. Fetal breathing movements begin around week 20 or 21, and occur
when contractions of the respiratory muscles cause the fetus to inhale
and exhale amniotic fluid. These movements continue until birth and may
help to tone the muscles in preparation for breathing after birth and
are a sign of good health.
{: #fs-id2353640}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2327998" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1372139">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2023920" markdown="1">
The olfactory pits form from which of the following?
{: #fs-id2763282}

1.  mesoderm
2.  cartilage
3.  ectoderm
4.  endoderm
{: #fs-id2669946 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2754063" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id2673838}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2069835">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2270075" markdown="1">
A full complement of mature alveoli are present by ________.
{: #fs-id2029588}

1.  early childhood, around 8 years of age
2.  birth
3.  37 weeks
4.  16 weeks
{: #fs-id1910387 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2574550" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id2459217}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2288656">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2152874" markdown="1">
If a baby is born prematurely before type II cells produce sufficient
pulmonary surfactant, which of the following might you expect?
{: #fs-id2711724}

1.  difficulty expressing fluid
2.  difficulty inflating the lungs
3.  difficulty with pulmonary capillary flow
4.  no difficulty as type I cells can provide enough surfactant for
    normal breathing
{: #fs-id2282878 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1904525" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id2519555}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2019566">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1574261" markdown="1">
When do fetal breathing movements begin?
{: #fs-id2212686}

1.  around week 20
2.  around week 37
3.  around week 16
4.  after birth
{: #fs-id2772030 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2674262" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id2237183}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1605776">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2929621" markdown="1">
What happens to the fluid that remains in the lungs after birth?
{: #fs-id2929622}

1.  It reduces the surface tension of the alveoli.
2.  It is expelled shortly after birth.
3.  It is absorbed shortly after birth.
4.  It lubricates the pleurae.
{: #fs-id2361899 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2264122" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id2632951}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2590276" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2760342">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2679107" markdown="1">
During what timeframe does a fetus have enough mature structures to
breathe on its own if born prematurely? Describe the other structures
that develop during this phase.
{: #fs-id2679108}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2144392" data-label="" markdown="1">
At about week 28, enough alveolar precursors have matured so that a baby
born prematurely at this time can usually breathe on its own. Other
structures that develop about this time are pulmonary capillaries,
expanding to create a large surface area for gas exchange. Alveolar
ducts and alveolar precursors have also developed.
{: #fs-id2579629}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2526718">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1576864" markdown="1">
Describe fetal breathing movements and their purpose.
{: #fs-id1576865}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1226702" data-label="" markdown="1">
Fetal breathing movements occur due to the contraction of respiratory
muscles, causing the fetus to inhale and exhale amniotic fluid. It is
thought that these movements are a way to “practice” breathing, which
results in toning the muscles in preparation for breathing after birth.
In addition, fetal breathing movements may help alveoli to form and
mature.
{: #fs-id1605656}

</div>
</div>
</section>



