---
title: "Nervous Tissue"
layout: page
tags: debug
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
* Describe the basic structure of a neuron
* Identify the different types of neurons on the basis of polarity
* List the glial cells of the CNS and describe their function
* List the glial cells of the PNS and describe their function

</div>
Nervous tissue is composed of two types of cells, neurons and glial
cells. Neurons are the primary type of cell that most anyone associates
with the nervous system. They are responsible for the computation and
communication that the nervous system provides. They are electrically
active and release chemical signals to target cells. Glial cells, or
glia, are known to play a supporting role for nervous tissue. Ongoing
research pursues an expanded role that glial cells might play in
signaling, but neurons are still considered the basis of this function.
Neurons are important, but without glial support they would not be able
to perform their function.

# Neurons

Neurons are the cells considered to be the basis of nervous tissue. They
are responsible for the electrical signals that communicate information
about sensations, and that produce movements in response to those
stimuli, along with inducing thought processes within the brain. An
important part of the function of neurons is in their structure, or
shape. The three-dimensional shape of these cells makes the immense
numbers of connections within the nervous system possible.

## Parts of a Neuron

As you learned in the first section, the main part of a neuron is the
cell body, which is also known as the soma (soma = “body”). The cell
body contains the nucleus and most of the major organelles. But what
makes neurons special is that they have many extensions of their cell
membranes, which are generally referred to as processes. Neurons are
usually described as having one, and only one, axon—a fiber that emerges
from the cell body and projects to target cells. That single axon can
branch repeatedly to communicate with many target cells. It is the axon
that propagates the nerve impulse, which is communicated to one or more
cells. The other processes of the neuron are dendrites, which receive
information from other neurons at specialized areas of contact called
<span data-type="term">synapses</span>. The dendrites are usually highly
branched processes, providing locations for other neurons to communicate
with the cell body. Information flows through a neuron from the
dendrites, across the cell body, and down the axon. This gives the
neuron a polarity—meaning that information flows in this one direction.
[\[link\]](#fig-ch12_02_01){: .autogenerated-content} shows the
relationship of these parts to one another.

![This illustration shows the anatomy of a neuron. The neuron has a very irregular cell body (soma) containing a purple nucleus. There are six projections protruding from the top, bottom and left side of the cell body. Each of the projections branches many times, forming small, tree-shaped structures protruding from the cell body. The right side of the cell body tapers into a long cord called the axon. The axon is insulated by segments of myelin sheath, which resemble a semitransparent toilet paper roll wound around the axon. The myelin sheath is not continuous, but is separated into equally spaced segments. The bare axon segments between the sheath segments are called nodes of Ranvier. An oligodendrocyte is reaching its two arm like projections onto two myelin sheath segments. The axon branches many times at its end, where it connects to the dendrites of another neuron. Each connection between an axon branch and a dendrite is called a synapse. The cell membrane completely surrounds the cell body, dendrites, and its axon. The axon of another nerve is seen in the upper left of the diagram connecting with the dendrites of the central neuron.](../resources/1206_The_Neuron.jpg " The major parts of the neuron are labeled on a multipolar neuron from the CNS."){: #fig-ch12_02_01 data-media-type="image/jpg" data-title="Parts of a Neuron"}

Where the axon emerges from the cell body, there is a special region
referred to as the <span data-type="term">axon hillock</span>. This is a
tapering of the cell body toward the axon fiber. Within the axon
hillock, the cytoplasm changes to a solution of limited components
called <span data-type="term">axoplasm</span>. Because the axon hillock
represents the beginning of the axon, it is also referred to as the
<span data-type="term">initial segment</span>.

Many axons are wrapped by an insulating substance called myelin, which
is actually made from glial cells. Myelin acts as insulation much like
the plastic or rubber that is used to insulate electrical wires. A key
difference between myelin and the insulation on a wire is that there are
gaps in the myelin covering of an axon. Each gap is called a <span
data-type="term">node of Ranvier</span> and is important to the way that
electrical signals travel down the axon. The length of the axon between
each gap, which is wrapped in myelin, is referred to as an <span
data-type="term">axon segment</span>. At the end of the axon is the
<span data-type="term">axon terminal</span>, where there are usually
several branches extending toward the target cell, each of which ends in
an enlargement called a <span data-type="term">synaptic end bulb</span>.
These bulbs are what make the connection with the target cell at the
synapse.

<div data-type="note" class="anatomy interactive" data-label="" markdown="1">
<span data-type="media" data-alt="QR Code representing a URL"> ![QR Code
representing a URL](../resources/nervetissue3.png){:
data-media-type="image/png"} </span>
Visit this [site][1] to learn about how nervous tissue is composed of
neurons and glial cells. Neurons are dynamic cells with the ability to
make a vast number of connections, to respond incredibly quickly to
stimuli, and to initiate movements on the basis of those stimuli. They
are the focus of intense research because failures in physiology can
lead to devastating illnesses. Why are neurons only found in animals?
Based on what this article says about neuron function, why wouldn\'t
they be helpful for plants or microorganisms?

</div>

## Types of Neurons

There are many neurons in the nervous system—a number in the trillions.
And there are many different types of neurons. They can be classified by
many different criteria. The first way to classify them is by the number
of processes attached to the cell body. Using the standard model of
neurons, one of these processes is the axon, and the rest are dendrites.
Because information flows through the neuron from dendrites or cell
bodies toward the axon, these names are based on the neuron\'s polarity
([\[link\]](#fig-ch12_02_02){: .autogenerated-content}).

![Three illustrations show some of the possible shapes that neurons can take. In the unipolar neuron, the dendrite enters from the left and merges with the axon into a common pathway, which is connected to the cell body. The axon leaves the cell body through the common pathway, the branches off to the right, in the opposite direction as the dendrite. Therefore, this neuron is T shaped. In the bipolar neuron, the dendrite enters into the left side of the cell body while the axon emerges from the opposite (right) side. In a multipolar neuron, multiple dendrites enter into the cell body. The only part of the cell body that does not have dendrites is the part that elongates into the axon.](../resources/1207_Neuron_Shape_Classification.jpg " Unipolar cells have one process that includes both the axon and dendrite. Bipolar cells have two processes, the axon and a dendrite. Multipolar cells have more than two processes, the axon and two or more dendrites."){: #fig-ch12_02_02 data-media-type="image/jpg" data-title="Neuron Classification by Shape"}

<span data-type="term">Unipolar</span> cells have only one process
emerging from the cell. True unipolar cells are only found in
invertebrate animals, so the unipolar cells in humans are more
appropriately called “pseudo-unipolar” cells. Invertebrate unipolar
cells do not have dendrites. Human unipolar cells have an axon that
emerges from the cell body, but it splits so that the axon can extend
along a very long distance. At one end of the axon are dendrites, and at
the other end, the axon forms synaptic connections with a target.
Unipolar cells are exclusively sensory neurons and have two unique
characteristics. First, their dendrites are receiving sensory
information, sometimes directly from the stimulus itself. Secondly, the
cell bodies of unipolar neurons are always found in ganglia. Sensory
reception is a peripheral function (those dendrites are in the
periphery, perhaps in the skin) so the cell body is in the periphery,
though closer to the CNS in a ganglion. The axon projects from the
dendrite endings, past the cell body in a ganglion, and into the central
nervous system.

<span data-type="term">Bipolar</span> cells have two processes, which
extend from each end of the cell body, opposite to each other. One is
the axon and one the dendrite. Bipolar cells are not very common. They
are found mainly in the olfactory epithelium (where smell stimuli are
sensed), and as part of the retina.

<span data-type="term">Multipolar</span> neurons are all of the neurons
that are not unipolar or bipolar. They have one axon and two or more
dendrites (usually many more). With the exception of the unipolar
sensory ganglion cells, and the two specific bipolar cells mentioned
above, all other neurons are multipolar. Some cutting edge research
suggests that certain neurons in the CNS do not conform to the standard
model of “one, and only one” axon. Some sources describe a fourth type
of neuron, called an anaxonic neuron. The name suggests that it has no
axon (an- = “without”), but this is not accurate. Anaxonic neurons are
very small, and if you look through a microscope at the standard
resolution used in histology (approximately 400X to 1000X total
magnification), you will not be able to distinguish any process
specifically as an axon or a dendrite. Any of those processes can
function as an axon depending on the conditions at any given time.
Nevertheless, even if they cannot be easily seen, and one specific
process is definitively the axon, these neurons have multiple processes
and are therefore multipolar.

Neurons can also be classified on the basis of where they are found, who
found them, what they do, or even what chemicals they use to communicate
with each other. Some neurons referred to in this section on the nervous
system are named on the basis of those sorts of classifications
([\[link\]](#fig-ch12_02_03){: .autogenerated-content}). For example, a
multipolar neuron that has a very important role to play in a part of
the brain called the cerebellum is known as a Purkinje (commonly
pronounced per-KIN-gee) cell. It is named after the anatomist who
discovered it (Jan Evangilista Purkinje, 1787–1869).

![This diagram contains three black and white drawings of more specialized nerve cells. Part A shows a pyramidal cell of the cerebral cortex, which has two, long, nerve tracts attached to the top and bottom of the cell body. However, the cell body also has many shorter dendrites projecting out a short distance from the cell body. Part B shows a Purkinje cell of the cerebellar cortex. This cell has a single, long, nerve tract entering the bottom of the cell body. Two large nerve tracts leave the top of the cell body but immediately branch many times to form a large web of nerve fibers. Therefore, the purkinje cell somewhat resembles a shrub or coral in shape. Part C shows the olfactory cells in the olfactory epithelium and olfactory bulbs. It contains several cell groups linked together. At the bottom, there is a row of olfactory epithelial cells that are tightly packed, side-by-side, somewhat resembling the slats on a fence. There are six neurons embedded in this epithelium. Each neuron connects to the epithelium through branching nerve fibers projecting from the bottom of their cell bodies. A single nerve fiber projects from the top of each neuron and synapses with nerve fibers from the neurons above. These upper neurons are cross shaped, with one nerve fiber projecting from the bottom, top, right and left sides. The upper cells synapse with the epithelial nerve cells using the nerve tract projecting from the bottom of their cell body. The nerve tract projecting from the top continues the pathway, making a ninety degree turn to the right and continuing to the right border of the image.](../resources/1208_Other_Types_of_Neurons.jpg " Three examples of neurons that are classified on the basis of other criteria. (a) The pyramidal cell is a multipolar cell with a cell body that is shaped something like a pyramid. (b) The Purkinje cell in the cerebellum was named after the scientist who originally described it. (c) Olfactory neurons are named for the functional group with which they belong."){: #fig-ch12_02_03 data-media-type="image/jpg" data-title="Other Neuron Classifications"}

# Glial Cells

Glial cells, or neuroglia or simply glia, are the other type of cell
found in nervous tissue. They are considered to be supporting cells, and
many functions are directed at helping neurons complete their function
for communication. The name glia comes from the Greek word that means
“glue,” and was coined by the German pathologist Rudolph Virchow, who
wrote in 1856: “This connective substance, which is in the brain, the
spinal cord, and the special sense nerves, is a kind of glue (neuroglia)
in which the nervous elements are planted.” Today, research into nervous
tissue has shown that there are many deeper roles that these cells play.
And research may find much more about them in the future.

There are six types of glial cells. Four of them are found in the CNS
and two are found in the PNS. [\[link\]](#tbl-ch12_02){:
.autogenerated-content} outlines some common characteristics and
functions.

<table id="tbl-ch12_02" summary="" data-label=""><thead> <tr> <th colspan="3">Glial Cell Types by Location and Basic Function</th> </tr> <tr> <th>CNS glia</th> <th>PNS glia</th> <th>Basic function</th> </tr> </thead><tbody> <tr> <td>Astrocyte</td> <td>Satellite cell</td> <td>Support</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Oligodendrocyte</td> <td>Schwann cell</td> <td>Insulation, myelination</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Microglia</td> <td>-</td> <td>Immune surveillance and phagocytosis</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Ependymal cell</td> <td>-</td> <td>Creating CSF</td> </tr> </tbody></table>## Glial Cells of the CNS

One cell providing support to neurons of the CNS is the <span
data-type="term">astrocyte</span>, so named because it appears to be
star-shaped under the microscope (astro- = “star”). Astrocytes have many
processes extending from their main cell body (not axons or dendrites
like neurons, just cell extensions). Those processes extend to interact
with neurons, blood vessels, or the connective tissue covering the CNS
that is called the pia mater ([\[link\]](#fig-ch12_02_04){:
.autogenerated-content}). Generally, they are supporting cells for the
neurons in the central nervous system. Some ways in which they support
neurons in the central nervous system are by maintaining the
concentration of chemicals in the extracellular space, removing excess
signaling molecules, reacting to tissue damage, and contributing to the
<span data-type="term">blood-brain barrier (BBB)</span>. The blood-brain
barrier is a physiological barrier that keeps many substances that
circulate in the rest of the body from getting into the central nervous
system, restricting what can cross from circulating blood into the CNS.
Nutrient molecules, such as glucose or amino acids, can pass through the
BBB, but other molecules cannot. This actually causes problems with drug
delivery to the CNS. Pharmaceutical companies are challenged to design
drugs that can cross the BBB as well as have an effect on the nervous
system.

![This diagram shows several types of nervous system cells associated with two multipolar neurons. Astrocytes are star shaped-cells with many dendrite like projections but no axon. They are connected with the multipolar neurons and other cells in the diagram through their dendrite like projections. Ependymal cells have a teardrop shaped cell body and a long tail that branches several times before connecting with astrocytes and the multipolar neuron. Microglial cells are small cells with rectangular bodies and many dendrite like projections stemming from their shorter sides. The projections are so extensive that they give the microglial cell a fuzzy appearance. The oligodendrocytes have circular cell bodies with four dendrite like projections. Each projection is connected to a segment of myelin sheath on the axons of the multipolar neurons. The oligodendrocytes are the same color as the myelin sheath segment and are adding layers to the sheath using their projections.](../resources/1209_Glial_Cells_of_the_CNS-02.jpg " The CNS has astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, microglia, and ependymal cells that support the neurons of the CNS in several ways."){: #fig-ch12_02_04 data-media-type="image/jpg" data-title="Glial Cells of the CNS"}

Like a few other parts of the body, the brain has a privileged blood
supply. Very little can pass through by diffusion. Most substances that
cross the wall of a blood vessel into the CNS must do so through an
active transport process. Because of this, only specific types of
molecules can enter the CNS. Glucose—the primary energy source—is
allowed, as are amino acids. Water and some other small particles, like
gases and ions, can enter. But most everything else cannot, including
white blood cells, which are one of the body’s main lines of defense.
While this barrier protects the CNS from exposure to toxic or pathogenic
substances, it also keeps out the cells that could protect the brain and
spinal cord from disease and damage. The BBB also makes it harder for
pharmaceuticals to be developed that can affect the nervous system.
Aside from finding efficacious substances, the means of delivery is also
crucial.

Also found in CNS tissue is the <span
data-type="term">oligodendrocyte</span>, sometimes called just “oligo,”
which is the glial cell type that insulates axons in the CNS. The name
means “cell of a few branches” (oligo- = “few”; dendro- = “branches”;
-cyte = “cell”). There are a few processes that extend from the cell
body. Each one reaches out and surrounds an axon to insulate it in
myelin. One oligodendrocyte will provide the myelin for multiple axon
segments, either for the same axon or for separate axons. The function
of myelin will be discussed below.

<span data-type="term">Microglia</span> are, as the name implies,
smaller than most of the other glial cells. Ongoing research into these
cells, although not entirely conclusive, suggests that they may
originate as white blood cells, called macrophages, that become part of
the CNS during early development. While their origin is not conclusively
determined, their function is related to what macrophages do in the rest
of the body. When macrophages encounter diseased or damaged cells in the
rest of the body, they ingest and digest those cells or the pathogens
that cause disease. Microglia are the cells in the CNS that can do this
in normal, healthy tissue, and they are therefore also referred to as
CNS-resident macrophages.

The <span data-type="term">ependymal cell</span> is a glial cell that
filters blood to make <span data-type="term">cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF)</span>, the fluid that circulates through the CNS. Because of the
privileged blood supply inherent in the BBB, the extracellular space in
nervous tissue does not easily exchange components with the blood.
Ependymal cells line each <span data-type="term">ventricle</span>, one
of four central cavities that are remnants of the hollow center of the
neural tube formed during the embryonic development of the brain. The
<span data-type="term">choroid plexus</span> is a specialized structure
in the ventricles where ependymal cells come in contact with blood
vessels and filter and absorb components of the blood to produce
cerebrospinal fluid. Because of this, ependymal cells can be considered
a component of the BBB, or a place where the BBB breaks down. These
glial cells appear similar to epithelial cells, making a single layer of
cells with little intracellular space and tight connections between
adjacent cells. They also have cilia on their apical surface to help
move the CSF through the ventricular space. The relationship of these
glial cells to the structure of the CNS is seen in
[\[link\]](#fig-ch12_02_04){: .autogenerated-content}.

## Glial Cells of the PNS

One of the two types of glial cells found in the PNS is the <span
data-type="term">satellite cell</span>. Satellite cells are found in
sensory and autonomic ganglia, where they surround the cell bodies of
neurons. This accounts for the name, based on their appearance under the
microscope. They provide support, performing similar functions in the
periphery as astrocytes do in the CNS—except, of course, for
establishing the BBB.

The second type of glial cell is the <span data-type="term">Schwann
cell</span>, which insulate axons with myelin in the periphery. Schwann
cells are different than oligodendrocytes, in that a Schwann cell wraps
around a portion of only one axon segment and no others.
Oligodendrocytes have processes that reach out to multiple axon
segments, whereas the entire Schwann cell surrounds just one axon
segment. The nucleus and cytoplasm of the Schwann cell are on the edge
of the myelin sheath. The relationship of these two types of glial cells
to ganglia and nerves in the PNS is seen in
[\[link\]](#fig-ch12_02_05){: .autogenerated-content}.

![This diagram shows a collection of PNS glial cells. The largest cell is a unipolar peripheral ganglionic neuron which has a common nerve tract projecting from the bottom of its cell body. The common nerve tract then splits into the axon, going off to the left, and the dendrite, going off to the right. The cell body of the neuron is covered with several satellite cells that are irregular, flattened, and take on the appearance of fried eggs. Schwann cells wrap around each myelin sheath segment on the axon, with their nucleus creating a small bump on each segment.](../resources/1210_Glial_Cells_of_the_PNS.jpg " The PNS has satellite cells and Schwann cells."){: #fig-ch12_02_05 data-media-type="image/jpg" data-title="Glial Cells of the PNS"}

## Myelin

The insulation for axons in the nervous system is provided by glial
cells, oligodendrocytes in the CNS, and Schwann cells in the PNS.
Whereas the manner in which either cell is associated with the axon
segment, or segments, that it insulates is different, the means of
myelinating an axon segment is mostly the same in the two situations.
Myelin is a lipid-rich sheath that surrounds the axon and by doing so
creates a <span data-type="term">myelin sheath</span> that facilitates
the transmission of electrical signals along the axon. The lipids are
essentially the phospholipids of the glial cell membrane. Myelin,
however, is more than just the membrane of the glial cell. It also
includes important proteins that are integral to that membrane. Some of
the proteins help to hold the layers of the glial cell membrane closely
together.

The appearance of the myelin sheath can be thought of as similar to the
pastry wrapped around a hot dog for “pigs in a blanket” or a similar
food. The glial cell is wrapped around the axon several times with
little to no cytoplasm between the glial cell layers. For
oligodendrocytes, the rest of the cell is separate from the myelin
sheath as a cell process extends back toward the cell body. A few other
processes provide the same insulation for other axon segments in the
area. For Schwann cells, the outermost layer of the cell membrane
contains cytoplasm and the nucleus of the cell as a bulge on one side of
the myelin sheath. During development, the glial cell is loosely or
incompletely wrapped around the axon ([\[link\]](#fig-ch12_02_06){:
.autogenerated-content}**a**). The edges of this loose enclosure extend
toward each other, and one end tucks under the other. The inner edge
wraps around the axon, creating several layers, and the other edge
closes around the outside so that the axon is completely enclosed.

<div data-type="note" class="anatomy interactive um" data-label="" markdown="1">
<span data-type="media" data-alt="QR Code representing a URL"> ![QR Code
representing a URL](../resources/nervefiber.png){:
data-media-type="image/png"} </span>
View the University of Michigan WebScope at
[http://virtualslides.med.umich.edu/Histology/EMsmallCharts/3%20Image%20Scope%20finals/054%20-%20Peripheral%20nerve\_001.svs/view.apml?listview=1&amp;][2]
to see an electron micrograph of a cross-section of a myelinated nerve
fiber. The axon contains microtubules and neurofilaments that are
bounded by a plasma membrane known as the axolemma. Outside the plasma
membrane of the axon is the myelin sheath, which is composed of the
tightly wrapped plasma membrane of a Schwann cell. What aspects of the
cells in this image react with the stain to make them a deep, dark,
black color, such as the multiple layers that are the myelin sheath?

</div>
Myelin sheaths can extend for one or two millimeters, depending on the
diameter of the axon. Axon diameters can be as small as 1 to 20
micrometers. Because a micrometer is 1/1000 of a millimeter, this means
that the length of a myelin sheath can be 100–1000 times the diameter of
the axon. [\[link\]](#fig-ch12_02_01){: .autogenerated-content},
[\[link\]](#fig-ch12_02_04){: .autogenerated-content}, and
[\[link\]](#fig-ch12_02_05){: .autogenerated-content} show the myelin
sheath surrounding an axon segment, but are not to scale. If the myelin
sheath were drawn to scale, the neuron would have to be immense—possibly
covering an entire wall of the room in which you are sitting.

![This three-part diagram shows the process of myelination. In step A, the cell membrane of a cylindrical Schwann cell, which has a blue nucleus, has indented around an axon. An upper and lower lip of the cell membrane is visible where the membrane indents around the axon. In part B, the lower lip of the cell membrane dives under the upper lip and wraps around the axon. In part C, the process in part B has continued, forming many layers of myelin that wrap around the axon. The nucleus of the Schwann cell is still visible in the outermost layer, just to the left of the upper lip. The area of the axon next to the Schwann cell, which has no myelin, is labeled as a node of Ranvier.](../resources/1211_Myelinated_Neuron.jpg " Myelinating glia wrap several layers of cell membrane around the cell membrane of an axon segment. A single Schwann cell insulates a segment of a peripheral nerve, whereas in the CNS, an oligodendrocyte may provide insulation for a few separate axon segments. EM &#xD7; 1,460,000. (Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School &#xA9; 2012)"){: #fig-ch12_02_06 data-media-type="image/jpg" data-title="The Process of Myelination"}

<div data-type="note" class="anatomy disorders" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Disorders of the…
</div>
<span data-type="title">Nervous Tissue</span> Several diseases can
result from the demyelination of axons. The causes of these diseases are
not the same; some have genetic causes, some are caused by pathogens,
and others are the result of autoimmune disorders. Though the causes are
varied, the results are largely similar. The myelin insulation of axons
is compromised, making electrical signaling slower.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is one such disease. It is an example of an
autoimmune disease. The antibodies produced by lymphocytes (a type of
white blood cell) mark myelin as something that should not be in the
body. This causes inflammation and the destruction of the myelin in the
central nervous system. As the insulation around the axons is destroyed
by the disease, scarring becomes obvious. This is where the name of the
disease comes from; sclerosis means hardening of tissue, which is what a
scar is. Multiple scars are found in the white matter of the brain and
spinal cord. The symptoms of MS include both somatic and autonomic
deficits. Control of the musculature is compromised, as is control of
organs such as the bladder.

Guillain-Barré (pronounced gee-YAN bah-RAY) syndrome is an example of a
demyelinating disease of the peripheral nervous system. It is also the
result of an autoimmune reaction, but the inflammation is in peripheral
nerves. Sensory symptoms or motor deficits are common, and autonomic
failures can lead to changes in the heart rhythm or a drop in blood
pressure, especially when standing, which causes dizziness.

</div>

# Chapter Review

Nervous tissue contains two major cell types, neurons and glial cells.
Neurons are the cells responsible for communication through electrical
signals. Glial cells are supporting cells, maintaining the environment
around the neurons.

Neurons are polarized cells, based on the flow of electrical signals
along their membrane. Signals are received at the dendrites, are passed
along the cell body, and propagate along the axon towards the target,
which may be another neuron, muscle tissue, or a gland. Many axons are
insulated by a lipid-rich substance called myelin. Specific types of
glial cells provide this insulation.

Several types of glial cells are found in the nervous system, and they
can be categorized by the anatomical division in which they are found.
In the CNS, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, microglia, and ependymal cells
are found. Astrocytes are important for maintaining the chemical
environment around the neuron and are crucial for regulating the
blood-brain barrier. Oligodendrocytes are the myelinating glia in the
CNS. Microglia act as phagocytes and play a role in immune surveillance.
Ependymal cells are responsible for filtering the blood to produce
cerebrospinal fluid, which is a circulatory fluid that performs some of
the functions of blood in the brain and spinal cord because of the BBB.
In the PNS, satellite cells are supporting cells for the neurons, and
Schwann cells insulate peripheral axons.

# Interactive Link Questions

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Visit this [site][1] to learn about how nervous tissue is composed of
neurons and glial cells. The neurons are dynamic cells with the ability
to make a vast number of connections and to respond incredibly quickly
to stimuli and to initiate movements based on those stimuli. They are
the focus of intense research as failures in physiology can lead to
devastating illnesses. Why are neurons only found in animals? Based on
what this article says about neuron function, why wouldn’t they be
helpful for plants or microorganisms?

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
Neurons enable thought, perception, and movement. Plants do not move, so
they do not need this type of tissue. Microorganisms are too small to
have a nervous system. Many are single-celled, and therefore have
organelles for perception and movement.

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
View the University of Michigan WebScope at
[http://virtualslides.med.umich.edu/Histology/EMsmallCharts/3%20Image%20Scope%20finals/054%20-%20Peripheral%20nerve_001.svs/view.apml?listview=1&amp;][2]
to see an electron micrograph of a cross-section of a myelinated nerve
fiber. The axon contains microtubules and neurofilaments, bounded by a
plasma membrane known as the axolemma. Outside the plasma membrane of
the axon is the myelin sheath, which is composed of the tightly wrapped
plasma membrane of a Schwann cell. What aspects of the cells in this
image react with the stain that makes them the deep, dark, black color,
such as the multiple layers that are the myelin sheath?

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
Lipid membranes, such as the cell membrane and organelle membranes.

</div>
</div>

# Review Questions

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What type of glial cell provides myelin for the axons in a tract?

1.  oligodendrocyte
2.  astrocyte
3.  Schwann cell
4.  satellite cell
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
A

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Which part of a neuron contains the nucleus?

1.  dendrite
2.  soma
3.  axon
4.  synaptic end bulb
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
B

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Which of the following substances is least able to cross the blood-brain
barrier?

1.  water
2.  sodium ions
3.  glucose
4.  white blood cells
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
D

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What type of glial cell is the resident macrophage behind the
blood-brain barrier?

1.  microglia
2.  astrocyte
3.  Schwann cell
4.  satellite cell
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
A

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What two types of macromolecules are the main components of myelin?

1.  carbohydrates and lipids
2.  proteins and nucleic acids
3.  lipids and proteins
4.  carbohydrates and nucleic acids
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
C

</div>
</div>

# Critical Thinking Questions

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Multiple sclerosis is a demyelinating disease affecting the central
nervous system. What type of cell would be the most likely target of
this disease? Why?

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
The disease would target oligodendrocytes. In the CNS, oligodendrocytes
provide the myelin for axons.

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Which type of neuron, based on its shape, is best suited for relaying
information directly from one neuron to another? Explain why.

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
Bipolar cells, because they have one dendrite that receives input and
one axon that provides output, would be a direct relay between two other
cells.

</div>
</div>



[1]: http://openstaxcollege.org/l/nervetissue3
[2]: http://openstaxcollege.org/l/nervefiber
