---
title: The Immune Response against Pathogens
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Explain the development of immunological competence
* Describe the mucosal immune response
* Discuss immune responses against bacterial, viral, fungal, and animal
  pathogens
* Describe different ways pathogens evade immune responses

</div>
Now that you understand the development of mature, naïve B cells and T
cells, and some of their major functions, how do all of these various
cells, proteins, and cytokines come together to actually resolve an
infection? Ideally, the immune response will rid the body of a pathogen
entirely. The adaptive immune response, with its rapid clonal expansion,
is well suited to this purpose. Think of a primary infection as a race
between the pathogen and the immune system. The pathogen bypasses
barrier defenses and starts multiplying in the host’s body. During the
first 4 to 5 days, the innate immune response will partially control,
but not stop, pathogen growth. As the adaptive immune response gears up,
however, it will begin to clear the pathogen from the body, while at the
same time becoming stronger and stronger. When following antibody
responses in patients with a particular disease such as a virus, this
clearance is referred to as seroconversion (sero- = “serum”). <span
data-type="term">Seroconversion</span> is the reciprocal relationship
between virus levels in the blood and antibody levels. As the antibody
levels rise, the virus levels decline, and this is a sign that the
immune response is being at least partially effective (partially,
because in many diseases, seroconversion does not necessarily mean a
patient is getting well).
{: #fs-id1982969}

An excellent example of this is seroconversion during HIV disease
([\[link\]](#fig-ch22_05_01){: .autogenerated-content}). Notice that
antibodies are made early in this disease, and the increase in anti-HIV
antibodies correlates with a decrease in detectable virus in the blood.
Although these antibodies are an important marker for diagnosing the
disease, they are not sufficient to completely clear the virus. Several
years later, the vast majority of these individuals, if untreated, will
lose their entire adaptive immune response, including the ability to
make antibodies, during the final stages of AIDS.
{: #fs-id1373635}

<figure id="fig-ch22_05_01">
<div data-type="title">
HIV Disease Progression
</div>
<figcaption>
Seroconversion, the rise of anti-HIV antibody levels and the concomitant
decline in measurable virus levels, happens during the first several
months of HIV disease. Unfortunately, this antibody response is
ineffective at controlling the disease, as seen by the progression of
the disease towards AIDS, in which all adaptive immune responses are
compromised.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1882242" data-alt="This graph shows the
concentration of HIV viral particles in blood over time in years.">
![This graph shows the concentration of HIV viral particles in blood
over time in years.](../resources/2225_HIV_Disease_Progression.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="480"} </span>
</figure>
<div data-type="note" id="fs-id1489212" class="anatomy everyday" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Everyday Connection
</div>
<span data-type="title">Disinfectants: Fighting the Good Fight?</span>
“Wash your hands!” Parents have been telling their children this for
generations. Dirty hands can spread disease. But is it possible to get
rid of enough pathogens that children will never get sick? Are children
who avoid exposure to pathogens better off? The answers to both these
questions appears to be no.
{: #fs-id1636656}

Antibacterial wipes, soaps, gels, and even toys with antibacterial
substances embedded in their plastic are ubiquitous in our society.
Still, these products do not rid the skin and gastrointestinal tract of
bacteria, and it would be harmful to our health if they did. We need
these nonpathogenic bacteria on and within our bodies to keep the
pathogenic ones from growing. The urge to keep children perfectly clean
is thus probably misguided. Children will get sick anyway, and the later
benefits of immunological memory far outweigh the minor discomforts of
most childhood diseases. In fact, getting diseases such as chickenpox or
measles later in life is much harder on the adult and are associated
with symptoms significantly worse than those seen in the childhood
illnesses. Of course, vaccinations help children avoid some illnesses,
but there are so many pathogens, we will never be immune to them all.
{: #fs-id1350098}

Could over-cleanliness be the reason that allergies are increasing in
more developed countries? Some scientists think so. Allergies are based
on an IgE antibody response. Many scientists think the system evolved to
help the body rid itself of worm parasites. The hygiene theory is the
idea that the immune system is geared to respond to antigens, and if
pathogens are not present, it will respond instead to inappropriate
antigens such as allergens and self-antigens. This is one explanation
for the rising incidence of allergies in developed countries, where the
response to nonpathogens like pollen, shrimp, and cat dander cause
allergic responses while not serving any protective function.
{: #fs-id1635434}

</div>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2341650" markdown="1">
# The Mucosal Immune Response
{: data-type="title"}

Mucosal tissues are major barriers to the entry of pathogens into the
body. The IgA (and sometimes IgM) antibodies in mucus and other
secretions can bind to the pathogen, and in the cases of many viruses
and bacteria, neutralize them. <span
data-type="term">Neutralization</span> is the process of coating a
pathogen with antibodies, making it physically impossible for the
pathogen to bind to receptors. Neutralization, which occurs in the
blood, lymph, and other body fluids and secretions, protects the body
constantly. Neutralizing antibodies are the basis for the disease
protection offered by vaccines. Vaccinations for diseases that commonly
enter the body via mucous membranes, such as influenza, are usually
formulated to enhance IgA production.
{: #fs-id2227440}

Immune responses in some mucosal tissues such as the Peyer’s patches
(see [\[link\]](/m46563#fig-ch22_01_10){: .autogenerated-content}) in
the small intestine take up particulate antigens by specialized cells
known as microfold or M cells ([\[link\]](#fig-ch22_05_02){:
.autogenerated-content}). These cells allow the body to sample potential
pathogens from the intestinal lumen. Dendritic cells then take the
antigen to the regional lymph nodes, where an immune response is
mounted.
{: #fs-id2270538}

<figure id="fig-ch22_05_02">
<div data-type="title">
IgA Immunity
</div>
<figcaption>
The nasal-associated lymphoid tissue and Peyer’s patches of the small
intestine generate IgA immunity. Both use M cells to transport antigen
inside the body so that immune responses can be mounted.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1907768" data-alt="This diagram shows
the process in which cells of the small intestine generate IgA
immunity."> ![This diagram shows the process in which cells of the small
intestine generate IgA immunity.](../resources/2226_IgA_Immunity.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="480"} </span>
</figure>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2151282" markdown="1">
# Defenses against Bacteria and Fungi
{: data-type="title"}

The body fights bacterial pathogens with a wide variety of immunological
mechanisms, essentially trying to find one that is effective. Bacteria
such as *Mycobacterium leprae*{: data-effect="italics"}, the cause of
leprosy, are resistant to lysosomal enzymes and can persist in
macrophage organelles or escape into the cytosol. In such situations,
infected macrophages receiving cytokine signals from Th1 cells turn on
special metabolic pathways. <span data-type="term">Macrophage oxidative
metabolism</span> is hostile to intracellular bacteria, often relying on
the production of nitric oxide to kill the bacteria inside the
macrophage.
{: #fs-id2594946}

Fungal infections, such as those from *Aspergillus*{:
data-effect="italics"}, *Candida*{: data-effect="italics"}, and
*Pneumocystis*{: data-effect="italics"}, are largely opportunistic
infections that take advantage of suppressed immune responses. Most of
the same immune mechanisms effective against bacteria have similar
effects on fungi, both of which have characteristic cell wall structures
that protect their cells.
{: #fs-id1240741}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2308796" markdown="1">
# Defenses against Parasites
{: data-type="title"}

Worm parasites such as helminths are seen as the primary reason why the
mucosal immune response, IgE-mediated allergy and asthma, and
eosinophils evolved. These parasites were at one time very common in
human society. When infecting a human, often via contaminated food, some
worms take up residence in the gastrointestinal tract. Eosinophils are
attracted to the site by T cell cytokines, which release their granule
contents upon their arrival. Mast cell degranulation also occurs, and
the fluid leakage caused by the increase in local vascular permeability
is thought to have a flushing action on the parasite, expelling its
larvae from the body. Furthermore, if IgE labels the parasite, the
eosinophils can bind to it by its Fc receptor.
{: #fs-id629152}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1866203" markdown="1">
# Defenses against Viruses
{: data-type="title"}

The primary mechanisms against viruses are NK cells, interferons, and
cytotoxic T cells. Antibodies are effective against viruses mostly
during protection, where an immune individual can neutralize them based
on a previous exposure. Antibodies have no effect on viruses or other
intracellular pathogens once they enter the cell, since antibodies are
not able to penetrate the plasma membrane of the cell. Many cells
respond to viral infections by downregulating their expression of MHC
class I molecules. This is to the advantage of the virus, because
without class I expression, cytotoxic T cells have no activity. NK
cells, however, can recognize virally infected class I-negative cells
and destroy them. Thus, NK and cytotoxic T cells have complementary
activities against virally infected cells.
{: #fs-id2300941}

Interferons have activity in slowing viral replication and are used in
the treatment of certain viral diseases, such as hepatitis B and C, but
their ability to eliminate the virus completely is limited. The
cytotoxic T cell response, though, is key, as it eventually overwhelms
the virus and kills infected cells before the virus can complete its
replicative cycle. Clonal expansion and the ability of cytotoxic T cells
to kill more than one target cell make these cells especially effective
against viruses. In fact, without cytotoxic T cells, it is likely that
humans would all die at some point from a viral infection (if no vaccine
were available).
{: #fs-id1522283}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1887881" markdown="1">
# Evasion of the Immune System by Pathogens
{: data-type="title"}

It is important to keep in mind that although the immune system has
evolved to be able to control many pathogens, pathogens themselves have
evolved ways to evade the immune response. An example already mentioned
is in *Mycobactrium tuberculosis*{: data-effect="italics"}, which has
evolved a complex cell wall that is resistant to the digestive enzymes
of the macrophages that ingest them, and thus persists in the host,
causing the chronic disease tuberculosis. This section briefly
summarizes other ways in which pathogens can “outwit” immune responses.
But keep in mind, although it seems as if pathogens have a will of their
own, they do not. All of these evasive “strategies” arose strictly by
evolution, driven by selection.
{: #fs-id2673661}

Bacteria sometimes evade immune responses because they exist in multiple
strains, such as different groups of *Staphylococcus aureus*{:
data-effect="italics"}. *S. aureus*{: data-effect="italics"} is commonly
found in minor skin infections, such as boils, and some healthy people
harbor it in their nose. One small group of strains of this bacterium,
however, called methicillin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus*{:
data-effect="italics"}, has become resistant to multiple antibiotics and
is essentially untreatable. Different bacterial strains differ in the
antigens on their surfaces. The immune response against one strain
(antigen) does not affect the other; thus, the species survives.
{: #fs-id2002997}

Another method of immune evasion is mutation. Because viruses’ surface
molecules mutate continuously, viruses like influenza change enough each
year that the flu vaccine for one year may not protect against the flu
common to the next. New vaccine formulations must be derived for each
flu season.
{: #fs-id1932396}

Genetic recombination—the combining of gene segments from two different
pathogens—is an efficient form of immune evasion. For example, the
influenza virus contains gene segments that can recombine when two
different viruses infect the same cell. Recombination between human and
pig influenza viruses led to the 2010 H1N1 swine flu outbreak.
{: #fs-id2101844}

Pathogens can produce immunosuppressive molecules that impair immune
function, and there are several different types. Viruses are especially
good at evading the immune response in this way, and many types of
viruses have been shown to suppress the host immune response in ways
much more subtle than the wholesale destruction caused by HIV.
{: #fs-id2237980}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1854360" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

Early childhood is a time when the body develops much of its
immunological memory that protects it from diseases in adulthood. The
components of the immune response that have the maximum effectiveness
against a pathogen are often associated with the class of pathogen
involved. Bacteria and fungi are especially susceptible to damage by
complement proteins, whereas viruses are taken care of by interferons
and cytotoxic T cells. Worms are attacked by eosinophils. Pathogens have
shown the ability, however, to evade the body’s immune responses, some
leading to chronic infections or even death. The immune system and
pathogens are in a slow, evolutionary race to see who stays on top.
Modern medicine, hopefully, will keep the results skewed in humans’
favor.
{: #fs-id1853731}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1435809" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1841131">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1855296" markdown="1">
Which enzymes in macrophages are important for clearing intracellular
bacteria?
{: #fs-id2528931}

1.  metabolic
2.  mitochondrial
3.  nuclear
4.  lysosomal
{: #fs-id1473031 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1521960" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id1349471}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2105019">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1381949" markdown="1">
What type of chronic lung disease is caused by a *Mycobacterium*{:
data-effect="italics"}?
{: #fs-id1381950}

1.  asthma
2.  emphysema
3.  tuberculosis
4.  leprosy
{: #fs-id2267734 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1641463" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id1487946}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1753105">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2057712" markdown="1">
Which type of immune response is most *directly*{:
data-effect="italics"} effective against bacteria?
{: #fs-id2520692}

1.  natural killer cells
2.  complement
3.  cytotoxic T cells
4.  helper T cells
{: #fs-id2097010 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1468822" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id1321465}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2464756">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1947271" markdown="1">
What is the reason that you have to be immunized with a new influenza
vaccine each year?
{: #fs-id1947272}

1.  the vaccine is only protective for a year
2.  mutation
3.  macrophage oxidative metabolism
4.  memory response
{: #fs-id1548410 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1637999" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id1865012}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1927907">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1971646" markdown="1">
Which type of immune response works in concert with cytotoxic T cells
against virally infected cells?
{: #fs-id1434845}

1.  natural killer cells
2.  complement
3.  antibodies
4.  memory
{: #fs-id1692360 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2239581" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id2153502}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1688568" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1883956">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2142239" markdown="1">
Describe how seroconversion works in HIV disease.
{: #fs-id2109911}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1857884" data-label="" markdown="1">
Seroconversion is the clearance of virus in the serum due to the
increase in specific serum antibody levels. Seroconversion happens in
the early stages of HIV disease. Unfortunately, the antibody cannot
completely clear the virus from the body and thus it most often
progresses to AIDS.
{: #fs-id2450246}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1838346">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2626918" markdown="1">
Describe tuberculosis and the innocent bystander effect.
{: #fs-id1340444}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2078594" data-label="" markdown="1">
Tuberculosis is caused by bacteria resistant to lysosomal enzymes in
alveolar macrophages, resulting in chronic infection. The immune
response to these bacteria actually causes most of the lung damage that
is characteristic of this life-threatening disease.
{: #fs-id1721022}

</div>
</div>
</section>



