---
title: Transplantation and Cancer Immunology
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Explain why blood typing is important and what happens when mismatched
  blood is used in a transfusion
* Describe how tissue typing is done during organ transplantation and
  the role of transplant anti-rejection drugs
* Show how the immune response is able to control some cancers and how
  this immune response might be enhanced by cancer vaccines

</div>
The immune responses to transplanted organs and to cancer cells are both
important medical issues. With the use of tissue typing and
anti-rejection drugs, transplantation of organs and the control of the
anti-transplant immune response have made huge strides in the past 50
years. Today, these procedures are commonplace. <span
data-type="term">Tissue typing</span> is the determination of MHC
molecules in the tissue to be transplanted to better match the donor to
the recipient. The immune response to cancer, on the other hand, has
been more difficult to understand and control. Although it is clear that
the immune system can recognize some cancers and control them, others
seem to be resistant to immune mechanisms.
{: #fs-id2122116}

<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1950171" markdown="1">
# The Rh Factor
{: data-type="title"}

Red blood cells can be typed based on their surface antigens. ABO blood
type, in which individuals are type A, B, AB, or O according to their
genetics, is one example. A separate antigen system seen on red blood
cells is the Rh antigen. When someone is “A positive” for example, the
positive refers to the presence of the Rh antigen, whereas someone who
is “A negative” would lack this molecule.
{: #fs-id1417330}

An interesting consequence of Rh factor expression is seen in <span
data-type="term">erythroblastosis fetalis</span>, a hemolytic disease of
the newborn ([\[link\]](#fig-ch22_07_01){: .autogenerated-content}).
This disease occurs when mothers negative for Rh antigen have multiple
Rh-positive children. During the birth of a first Rh-positive child, the
mother makes a primary anti-Rh antibody response to the fetal blood
cells that enter the maternal bloodstream. If the mother has a second
Rh-positive child, IgG antibodies against Rh-positive blood mounted
during this secondary response cross the placenta and attack the fetal
blood, causing anemia. This is a consequence of the fact that the fetus
is not genetically identical to the mother, and thus the mother is
capable of mounting an immune response against it. This disease is
treated with antibodies specific for Rh factor. These are given to the
mother during the subsequent births, destroying any fetal blood that
might enter her system and preventing the immune response.
{: #fs-id2158747}

<figure id="fig-ch22_07_01">
<div data-type="title">
Erythroblastosis Fetalis
</div>
<figcaption>
Erythroblastosis fetalis (hemolytic disease of the newborn) is the
result of an immune response in an Rh-negative mother who has multiple
children with an Rh-positive father. During the first birth, fetal blood
enters the mother’s circulatory system, and anti-Rh antibodies are made.
During the gestation of the second child, these antibodies cross the
placenta and attack the blood of the fetus. The treatment for this
disease is to give the mother anti-Rh antibodies (RhoGAM) during the
first pregnancy to destroy Rh-positive fetal red blood cells from
entering her system and causing the anti-Rh antibody response in the
first place.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1892568" data-alt="This figure shows
the progression of thedisease called erythroblastosis fetalis. The top
panel shows the umbilical artery and vein and the placenta. The center
panel shows the response in the immune system of a first Rh+ infant. The
bottom panel shows the response in the case of a second exposure for a
Rh+ infant."> ![This figure shows the progression of thedisease called
erythroblastosis fetalis. The top panel shows the umbilical artery and
vein and the placenta. The center panel shows the response in the immune
system of a first Rh+ infant. The bottom panel shows the response in the
case of a second exposure for a Rh+
infant.](../resources/2230_Erythroblastosis_Fetalis.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="500"} </span>
</figure>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1371098" markdown="1">
# Tissue Transplantation
{: data-type="title"}

Tissue transplantation is more complicated than blood transfusions
because of two characteristics of MHC molecules. These molecules are the
major cause of transplant rejection (hence the name
“histocompatibility”). <span data-type="term">MHC polygeny</span> refers
to the multiple MHC proteins on cells, and <span data-type="term">MHC
polymorphism</span> refers to the multiple alleles for each individual
MHC locus. Thus, there are many alleles in the human population that can
be expressed ([\[link\]](#tbl-ch22_08){: .autogenerated-content} and
[\[link\]](#tbl-ch22_09){: .autogenerated-content}). When a donor organ
expresses MHC molecules that are different from the recipient, the
latter will often mount a cytotoxic T cell response to the organ and
reject it. Histologically, if a biopsy of a transplanted organ exhibits
massive infiltration of T lymphocytes within the first weeks after
transplant, it is a sign that the transplant is likely to fail. The
response is a classical, and very specific, primary T cell immune
response. As far as medicine is concerned, the immune response in this
scenario does the patient no good at all and causes significant harm.
{: #fs-id2237570}

<table id="tbl-ch22_08" summary=""><thead> <tr> <th colspan="3">Partial Table of Alleles of the Human MHC (Class I)</th> </tr> <tr> <th>Gene</th> <th># of alleles</th> <th># of possible MHC I protein components</th> </tr> </thead><tbody> <tr><td>A</td> <td>2132</td> <td>1527</td> </tr> <tr> <td>B</td> <td>2798</td> <td>2110</td> </tr> <tr> <td>C</td> <td>1672</td> <td>1200</td> </tr> <tr> <td>E</td> <td>11</td> <td>3</td> </tr> <tr> <td>F</td> <td>22</td> <td>4</td> </tr> <tr> <td>G</td> <td>50</td> <td>16</td> </tr> </tbody></table>
<table id="tbl-ch22_09" summary=""><thead> <tr> <th colspan="3">Partial Table of Alleles of the Human MHC (Class II)</th> </tr> <tr> <th>Gene</th> <th># of alleles</th> <th># of possible MHC II protein components</th> </tr> </thead><tbody> <tr><td>DRA</td> <td>7</td> <td>2</td></tr> <tr> <td>DRB</td> <td>1297</td> <td>958</td> </tr> <tr> <td>DQA1</td> <td>49</td> <td>31</td> </tr> <tr><td>DQB1</td> <td>179</td> <td>128</td></tr> <tr> <td>DPA1</td> <td>36</td> <td>18</td> </tr> <tr><td>DPB1</td> <td>158</td> <td>136</td></tr> <tr> <td>DMA</td> <td>7</td> <td>4</td> </tr> <tr><td>DMB</td> <td>13</td> <td>7</td></tr> <tr><td>DOA</td> <td>12</td> <td>3</td> </tr> <tr><td>DOB</td> <td>13</td> <td>5</td> </tr></tbody></table>
Immunosuppressive drugs such as cyclosporine A have made transplants
more successful, but matching the MHC molecules is still key. In humans,
there are six MHC molecules that show the most polymorphisms, three
class I molecules (A, B, and C) and three class II molecules called DP,
DQ, and DR. A successful transplant usually requires a match between at
least 3–4 of these molecules, with more matches associated with greater
success. Family members, since they share a similar genetic background,
are much more likely to share MHC molecules than unrelated individuals
do. In fact, due to the extensive polymorphisms in these MHC molecules,
unrelated donors are found only through a worldwide database. The system
is not foolproof however, as there are not enough individuals in the
system to provide the organs necessary to treat all patients needing
them.
{: #fs-id1949990}

One disease of transplantation occurs with bone marrow transplants,
which are used to treat various diseases, including SCID and leukemia.
Because the bone marrow cells being transplanted contain lymphocytes
capable of mounting an immune response, and because the recipient’s
immune response has been destroyed before receiving the transplant, the
donor cells may attack the recipient tissues, causing <span
data-type="term">graft-versus-host disease</span>. Symptoms of this
disease, which usually include a rash and damage to the liver and
mucosa, are variable, and attempts have been made to moderate the
disease by first removing mature T cells from the donor bone marrow
before transplanting it.
{: #fs-id2229766}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1707607" markdown="1">
# Immune Responses Against Cancer
{: data-type="title"}

It is clear that with some cancers, for example Kaposi’s sarcoma, a
healthy immune system does a good job at controlling them
([\[link\]](#fig-ch22_07_02){: .autogenerated-content}). This disease,
which is caused by the human herpesvirus, is almost never observed in
individuals with strong immune systems, such as the young and
immunocompetent. Other examples of cancers caused by viruses include
liver cancer caused by the hepatitis B virus and cervical cancer caused
by the human papilloma virus. As these last two viruses have vaccines
available for them, getting vaccinated can help prevent these two types
of cancer by stimulating the immune response.
{: #fs-id1837177}

<figure id="fig-ch22_07_02">
<div data-type="title">
Karposi’s Sarcoma Lesions
</div>
<figcaption>
(credit: National Cancer Institute)
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1697696" data-alt="This photograph
shows lesions on the surface of skin."> ![This photograph shows lesions
on the surface of
skin.](../resources/2231_Kaposis_Sacroma_Lesions.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="380"} </span>
</figure>
On the other hand, as cancer cells are often able to divide and mutate
rapidly, they may escape the immune response, just as certain pathogens
such as HIV do. There are three stages in the immune response to many
cancers: elimination, equilibrium, and escape. Elimination occurs when
the immune response first develops toward tumor-specific antigens
specific to the cancer and actively kills most cancer cells, followed by
a period of controlled equilibrium during which the remaining cancer
cells are held in check. Unfortunately, many cancers mutate, so they no
longer express any specific antigens for the immune system to respond
to, and a subpopulation of cancer cells escapes the immune response,
continuing the disease process.
{: #fs-id2464332}

This fact has led to extensive research in trying to develop ways to
enhance the early immune response to completely eliminate the early
cancer and thus prevent a later escape. One method that has shown some
success is the use of cancer vaccines, which differ from viral and
bacterial vaccines in that they are directed against the cells of one’s
own body. Treated cancer cells are injected into cancer patients to
enhance their anti-cancer immune response and thereby prolong survival.
The immune system has the capability to detect these cancer cells and
proliferate faster than the cancer cells do, overwhelming the cancer in
a similar way as they do for viruses. Cancer vaccines have been
developed for malignant melanoma, a highly fatal skin cancer, and renal
(kidney) cell carcinoma. These vaccines are still in the development
stages, but some positive and encouraging results have been obtained
clinically.
{: #fs-id2265552}

It is tempting to focus on the complexity of the immune system and the
problems it causes as a negative. The upside to immunity, however, is so
much greater: The benefit of staying alive far outweighs the negatives
caused when the system does sometimes go awry. Working on “autopilot,”
the immune system helps to maintain your health and kill pathogens. The
only time you really miss the immune response is when it is not being
effective and illness results, or, as in the extreme case of HIV
disease, the immune system is gone completely.
{: #fs-id1698041}

<div data-type="note" id="fs-id2177358" class="anatomy everyday" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Everyday Connection
</div>
<span data-type="title">How Stress Affects the Immune Response: The
Connections between the Immune, Nervous, and Endocrine Systems of the
Body</span> The immune system cannot exist in isolation. After all, it
has to protect the entire body from infection. Therefore, the immune
system is required to interact with other organ systems, sometimes in
complex ways. Thirty years of research focusing on the connections
between the immune system, the central nervous system, and the endocrine
system have led to a new science with the unwieldy name of called <span
data-type="term">psychoneuroimmunology</span>. The physical connections
between these systems have been known for centuries: All primary and
secondary organs are connected to sympathetic nerves. What is more
complex, though, is the interaction of neurotransmitters, hormones,
cytokines, and other soluble signaling molecules, and the mechanism of
“crosstalk” between the systems. For example, white blood cells,
including lymphocytes and phagocytes, have receptors for various
neurotransmitters released by associated neurons. Additionally, hormones
such as cortisol (naturally produced by the adrenal cortex) and
prednisone (synthetic) are well known for their abilities to suppress T
cell immune mechanisms, hence, their prominent use in medicine as
long-term, anti-inflammatory drugs.
{: #fs-id2576560}

One well-established interaction of the immune, nervous, and endocrine
systems is the effect of stress on immune health. In the human
vertebrate evolutionary past, stress was associated with the
fight-or-flight response, largely mediated by the central nervous system
and the adrenal medulla. This stress was necessary for survival. The
physical action of fighting or running, whichever the animal decides,
usually resolves the problem in one way or another. On the other hand,
there are no physical actions to resolve most modern day stresses,
including short-term stressors like taking examinations and long-term
stressors such as being unemployed or losing a spouse. The effect of
stress can be felt by nearly every organ system, and the immune system
is no exception ([\[link\]](#tbl-ch22_10){: .autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id1866363}

<table id="tbl-ch22_10" summary=""><thead> <tr> <th colspan="2">Effects of Stress on Body Systems</th> </tr> <tr> <th>System</th> <th>Stress-related illness</th> </tr> </thead><tbody> <tr> <td>Integumentary system</td> <td>Acne, skin rashes, irritation</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Nervous system</td> <td>Headaches, depression, anxiety, irritability, loss of appetite, lack of motivation, reduced mental performance</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Muscular and skeletal systems</td> <td>Muscle and joint pain, neck and shoulder pain</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Circulatory system</td> <td>Increased heart rate, hypertension, increased probability of heart attacks</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Digestive system</td> <td>Indigestion, heartburn, stomach pain, nausea, diarrhea, constipation, weight gain or loss</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Immune system</td> <td>Depressed ability to fight infections</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Male reproductive system</td> <td>Lowered sperm production, impotence, reduced sexual desire</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Female reproductive system</td> <td>Irregular menstrual cycle, reduced sexual desire</td> </tr> </tbody></table>
At one time, it was assumed that all types of stress reduced all aspects
of the immune response, but the last few decades of research have
painted a different picture. First, most short-term stress does not
impair the immune system in healthy individuals enough to lead to a
greater incidence of diseases. However, older individuals and those with
suppressed immune responses due to disease or immunosuppressive drugs
may respond even to short-term stressors by getting sicker more often.
It has been found that short-term stress diverts the body’s resources
towards enhancing innate immune responses, which have the ability to act
fast and would seem to help the body prepare better for possible
infections associated with the trauma that may result from a
fight-or-flight exchange. The diverting of resources away from the
adaptive immune response, however, causes its own share of problems in
fighting disease.
{: #fs-id2363485}

Chronic stress, unlike short-term stress, may inhibit immune responses
even in otherwise healthy adults. The suppression of both innate and
adaptive immune responses is clearly associated with increases in some
diseases, as seen when individuals lose a spouse or have other long-term
stresses, such as taking care of a spouse with a fatal disease or
dementia. The new science of psychoneuroimmunology, while still in its
relative infancy, has great potential to make exciting advances in our
understanding of how the nervous, endocrine, and immune systems have
evolved together and communicate with each other.
{: #fs-id2328229}

</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2253394" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

Blood transfusion and organ transplantation both require an
understanding of the immune response to prevent medical complications.
Blood needs to be typed so that natural antibodies against mismatched
blood will not destroy it, causing more harm than good to the recipient.
Transplanted organs must be matched by their MHC molecules and, with the
use of immunosuppressive drugs, can be successful even if an exact
tissue match cannot be made. Another aspect to the immune response is
its ability to control and eradicate cancer. Although this has been
shown to occur with some rare cancers and those caused by known viruses,
the normal immune response to most cancers is not sufficient to control
cancer growth. Thus, cancer vaccines designed to enhance these immune
responses show promise for certain types of cancer.
{: #fs-id1250462}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2018932" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2110583">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1372749" markdown="1">
Which of the following terms means “many genes”?
{: #fs-id1855140}

1.  polymorphism
2.  polygeny
3.  polypeptide
4.  multiple alleles
{: #fs-id1352160 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1468241" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id1752899}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1400112">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1225648" markdown="1">
Why do we have natural antibodies?
{: #fs-id1381383}

1.  We don’t know why.
2.  immunity to environmental bacteria
3.  immunity to transplants
4.  from clonal selection
{: #fs-id1375714 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1636224" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id2135636}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1492110">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1321062" markdown="1">
Which type of cancer is associated with HIV disease?
{: #fs-id1321063}

1.  Kaposi’s sarcoma
2.  melanoma
3.  lymphoma
4.  renal cell carcinoma
{: #fs-id2278485 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1610212" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id1417234}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1401100">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id629143" markdown="1">
How does cyclosporine A work?
{: #fs-id1424111}

1.  suppresses antibodies
2.  suppresses T cells
3.  suppresses macrophages
4.  suppresses neutrophils
{: #fs-id1416942 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1249035" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id1635288}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2584330">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1354690" markdown="1">
What disease is associated with bone marrow transplants?
{: #fs-id1354691}

1.  diabetes mellitus type I
2.  melanoma
3.  headache
4.  graft-versus-host disease
{: #fs-id2080799 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1476824" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id2596426}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2004916" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2241846">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2236922" markdown="1">
Describe how stress affects immune responses.
{: #fs-id2236923}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2450689" data-label="" markdown="1">
Stress causes the release of hormones and the activation of nerves that
suppress the immune response. Short-term stress has little effect on the
health of an already healthy individual, whereas chronic stress does
lead to increases in disease in such people.
{: #fs-id2383485}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1906738" class="references" markdown="1">
# References
{: data-type="title"}

Robinson J, Mistry K, McWilliam H, Lopez R, Parham P, Marsh SG. Nucleic
acid research. IMGT/HLA Database \[Internet\]. 2011 \[cited 2013 Apr
1\]; 39:D1171–1176. Available from:
[http://europepmc.org/abstract/MED/21071412][1]
{: #eip-id1166357078798}

Robinson J, Malik A, Parham P, Bodmer JG, Marsh SG. Tissue antigens.
IMGT/HLA Database \[Internet\]. 2000 \[cited 2013 Apr 1\];
55(3):280–287. Available from:
[http://europepmc.org/abstract/MED/10777106/reload=0;jsessionid=otkdw3M0TIVSa2zhvimg.6][2]
{: #fs-id2019287}

</section>




[1]: http://europepmc.org/abstract/MED/21071412
[2]: http://europepmc.org/abstract/MED/10777106/reload=0;jsessionid=otkdw3M0TIVSa2zhvimg.6

