---
title: Overview of the Digestive System
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Identify the organs of the alimentary canal from proximal to distal,
  and briefly state their function
* Identify the accessory digestive organs and briefly state their
  function
* Describe the four fundamental tissue layers of the alimentary canal
* Contrast the contributions of the enteric and autonomic nervous
  systems to digestive system functioning
* Explain how the peritoneum anchors the digestive organs

</div>
The function of the digestive system is to break down the foods you eat,
release their nutrients, and absorb those nutrients into the body.
Although the small intestine is the workhorse of the system, where the
majority of digestion occurs, and where most of the released nutrients
are absorbed into the blood or lymph, each of the digestive system
organs makes a vital contribution to this process
([\[link\]](#fig-ch24_01_01){: .autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id2025409}

<figure id="fig-ch24_01_01">
<div data-type="title">
Components of the Digestive System
</div>
<figcaption>
All digestive organs play integral roles in the life-sustaining process
of digestion.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1841336" data-alt="This diagram shows
the digestive system of a human being, with the major organs labeled.">
![This diagram shows the digestive system of a human being, with the
major organs
labeled.](../resources/2401_Components_of_the_Digestive_System.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="400"} </span>
</figure>
As is the case with all body systems, the digestive system does not work
in isolation; it functions cooperatively with the other systems of the
body. Consider for example, the interrelationship between the digestive
and cardiovascular systems. Arteries supply the digestive organs with
oxygen and processed nutrients, and veins drain the digestive tract.
These intestinal veins, constituting the hepatic portal system, are
unique; they do not return blood directly to the heart. Rather, this
blood is diverted to the liver where its nutrients are off-loaded for
processing before blood completes its circuit back to the heart. At the
same time, the digestive system provides nutrients to the heart muscle
and vascular tissue to support their functioning. The interrelationship
of the digestive and endocrine systems is also critical. Hormones
secreted by several endocrine glands, as well as endocrine cells of the
pancreas, the stomach, and the small intestine, contribute to the
control of digestion and nutrient metabolism. In turn, the digestive
system provides the nutrients to fuel endocrine function.
[\[link\]](#tbl-ch24_01){: .autogenerated-content} gives a quick glimpse
at how these other systems contribute to the functioning of the
digestive system.
{: #fs-id1325264}

<table id="tbl-ch24_01" summary=""><thead> <tr> <th colspan="2">Contribution of Other Body Systems to the Digestive System</th> </tr> <tr> <th>Body system</th> <th>Benefits received by the digestive system</th> </tr> </thead><tbody> <tr> <td>Cardiovascular</td> <td>Blood supplies digestive organs with oxygen and processed nutrients</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Endocrine</td> <td>Endocrine hormones help regulate secretion in digestive glands and accessory organs</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Integumentary</td> <td>Skin helps protect digestive organs and synthesizes vitamin D for calcium absorption</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Lymphatic</td> <td>Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue and other lymphatic tissue defend against entry of pathogens; lacteals absorb lipids; and lymphatic vessels transport lipids to bloodstream</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Muscular</td> <td>Skeletal muscles support and protect abdominal organs</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Nervous</td> <td>Sensory and motor neurons help regulate secretions and muscle contractions in the digestive tract</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Respiratory</td> <td>Respiratory organs provide oxygen and remove carbon dioxide</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Skeletal</td> <td>Bones help protect and support digestive organs</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Urinary</td> <td>Kidneys convert vitamin D into its active form, allowing calcium absorption in the small intestine</td> </tr> </tbody></table>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1765369" markdown="1">
# Digestive System Organs
{: data-type="title"}

The easiest way to understand the digestive system is to divide its
organs into two main categories. The first group is the organs that make
up the alimentary canal. Accessory digestive organs comprise the second
group and are critical for orchestrating the breakdown of food and the
assimilation of its nutrients into the body. Accessory digestive organs,
despite their name, are critical to the function of the digestive
system.
{: #fs-id1284210}

<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1903465" markdown="1">
## Alimentary Canal Organs
{: data-type="title"}

Also called the gastrointestinal (GI) tract or gut, the <span
data-type="term">alimentary canal</span> (aliment- = “to nourish”) is a
one-way tube about 7.62 meters (25 feet) in length during life and
closer to 10.67 meters (35 feet) in length when measured after death,
once smooth muscle tone is lost. The main function of the organs of the
alimentary canal is to nourish the body. This tube begins at the mouth
and terminates at the anus. Between those two points, the canal is
modified as the pharynx, esophagus, stomach, and small and large
intestines to fit the functional needs of the body. Both the mouth and
anus are open to the external environment; thus, food and wastes within
the alimentary canal are technically considered to be outside the body.
Only through the process of absorption do the nutrients in food enter
into and nourish the body’s “inner space.”
{: #fs-id1259921}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id2129822" markdown="1">
## Accessory Structures
{: data-type="title"}

Each <span data-type="term">accessory digestive organ</span> aids in the
breakdown of food ([\[link\]](#fig-ch24_01_02){:
.autogenerated-content}). Within the mouth, the teeth and tongue begin
mechanical digestion, whereas the salivary glands begin chemical
digestion. Once food products enter the small intestine, the
gallbladder, liver, and pancreas release secretions—such as bile and
enzymes—essential for digestion to continue. Together, these are called
accessory organs because they sprout from the lining cells of the
developing gut (mucosa) and augment its function; indeed, you could not
live without their vital contributions, and many significant diseases
result from their malfunction. Even after development is complete, they
maintain a connection to the gut by way of ducts.
{: #fs-id2044663}

</section>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1907837" markdown="1">
# Histology of the Alimentary Canal
{: data-type="title"}

Throughout its length, the alimentary tract is composed of the same four
tissue layers; the details of their structural arrangements vary to fit
their specific functions. Starting from the lumen and moving outwards,
these layers are the mucosa, submucosa, muscularis, and serosa, which is
continuous with the mesentery (see [\[link\]](#fig-ch24_01_02){:
.autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id1972327}

<figure id="fig-ch24_01_02">
<div data-type="title">
Layers of the Alimentary Canal
</div>
<figcaption>
The wall of the alimentary canal has four basic tissue layers: the
mucosa, submucosa, muscularis, and serosa.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1410688" data-alt="This image shows the
cross section of the alimentary canal. The different layers of the
alimentary canal are shown as concentric cylinders with major muscles
and veins labeled."> ![This image shows the cross section of the
alimentary canal. The different layers of the alimentary canal are shown
as concentric cylinders with major muscles and veins
labeled.](../resources/2402_Layers_of_the_Gastrointestinal_Tract.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="480"} </span>
</figure>
The <span data-type="term">mucosa</span> is referred to as a mucous
membrane, because mucus production is a characteristic feature of gut
epithelium. The membrane consists of epithelium, which is in direct
contact with ingested food, and the lamina propria, a layer of
connective tissue analogous to the dermis. In addition, the mucosa has a
thin, smooth muscle layer, called the muscularis mucosa (not to be
confused with the muscularis layer, described below).
{: #fs-id2102397}

*Epithelium*{: data-effect="italics"}—In the mouth, pharynx, esophagus,
and anal canal, the epithelium is primarily a non-keratinized,
stratified squamous epithelium. In the stomach and intestines, it is a
simple columnar epithelium. Notice that the epithelium is in direct
contact with the lumen, the space inside the alimentary canal.
Interspersed among its epithelial cells are goblet cells, which secrete
mucus and fluid into the lumen, and enteroendocrine cells, which secrete
hormones into the interstitial spaces between cells. Epithelial cells
have a very brief lifespan, averaging from only a couple of days (in the
mouth) to about a week (in the gut). This process of rapid renewal helps
preserve the health of the alimentary canal, despite the wear and tear
resulting from continued contact with foodstuffs.
{: #fs-id2153505}

*Lamina propria*{: data-effect="italics"}—In addition to loose
connective tissue, the lamina propria contains numerous blood and
lymphatic vessels that transport nutrients absorbed through the
alimentary canal to other parts of the body. The lamina propria also
serves an immune function by housing clusters of lymphocytes, making up
the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT). These lymphocyte clusters
are particularly substantial in the distal ileum where they are known as
Peyer’s patches. When you consider that the alimentary canal is exposed
to foodborne bacteria and other foreign matter, it is not hard to
appreciate why the immune system has evolved a means of defending
against the pathogens encountered within it.
{: #fs-id2154740}

*Muscularis mucosa*{: data-effect="italics"}—This thin layer of smooth
muscle is in a constant state of tension, pulling the mucosa of the
stomach and small intestine into undulating folds. These folds
dramatically increase the surface area available for digestion and
absorption.
{: #fs-id1483592}

As its name implies, the <span data-type="term">submucosa</span> lies
immediately beneath the mucosa. A broad layer of dense connective
tissue, it connects the overlying mucosa to the underlying muscularis.
It includes blood and lymphatic vessels (which transport absorbed
nutrients), and a scattering of submucosal glands that release digestive
secretions. Additionally, it serves as a conduit for a dense branching
network of nerves, the submucosal plexus, which functions as described
below.
{: #fs-id1885631}

The third layer of the alimentary canal is the <span
data-type="term">muscalaris</span> (also called the muscularis externa).
The muscularis in the small intestine is made up of a double layer of
smooth muscle: an inner circular layer and an outer longitudinal layer.
The contractions of these layers promote mechanical digestion, expose
more of the food to digestive chemicals, and move the food along the
canal. In the most proximal and distal regions of the alimentary canal,
including the mouth, pharynx, anterior part of the esophagus, and
external anal sphincter, the muscularis is made up of skeletal muscle,
which gives you voluntary control over swallowing and defecation. The
basic two-layer structure found in the small intestine is modified in
the organs proximal and distal to it. The stomach is equipped for its
churning function by the addition of a third layer, the oblique muscle.
While the colon has two layers like the small intestine, its
longitudinal layer is segregated into three narrow parallel bands, the
tenia coli, which make it look like a series of pouches rather than a
simple tube.
{: #fs-id2110035}

The <span data-type="term">serosa</span> is the portion of the
alimentary canal superficial to the muscularis. Present only in the
region of the alimentary canal within the abdominal cavity, it consists
of a layer of visceral peritoneum overlying a layer of loose connective
tissue. Instead of serosa, the mouth, pharynx, and esophagus have a
dense sheath of collagen fibers called the adventitia. These tissues
serve to hold the alimentary canal in place near the ventral surface of
the vertebral column.
{: #fs-id2005910}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1371617" markdown="1">
# Nerve Supply
{: data-type="title"}

As soon as food enters the mouth, it is detected by receptors that send
impulses along the sensory neurons of cranial nerves. Without these
nerves, not only would your food be without taste, but you would also be
unable to feel either the food or the structures of your mouth, and you
would be unable to avoid biting yourself as you chew, an action enabled
by the motor branches of cranial nerves.
{: #fs-id1540801}

Intrinsic innervation of much of the alimentary canal is provided by the
enteric nervous system, which runs from the esophagus to the anus, and
contains approximately 100 million motor, sensory, and interneurons
(unique to this system compared to all other parts of the peripheral
nervous system). These enteric neurons are grouped into two plexuses.
The <span data-type="term">myenteric plexus</span> (plexus of Auerbach)
lies in the muscularis layer of the alimentary canal and is responsible
for <span data-type="term">motility</span>, especially the rhythm and
force of the contractions of the muscularis. The <span
data-type="term">submucosal plexus</span> (plexus of Meissner) lies in
the submucosal layer and is responsible for regulating digestive
secretions and reacting to the presence of food (see
[\[link\]](#fig-ch24_01_02){: .autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id1838265}

Extrinsic innervations of the alimentary canal are provided by the
autonomic nervous system, which includes both sympathetic and
parasympathetic nerves. In general, sympathetic activation (the
fight-or-flight response) restricts the activity of enteric neurons,
thereby decreasing GI secretion and motility. In contrast,
parasympathetic activation (the rest-and-digest response) increases GI
secretion and motility by stimulating neurons of the enteric nervous
system.
{: #fs-id1837017}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1890443" markdown="1">
# Blood Supply
{: data-type="title"}

The blood vessels serving the digestive system have two functions. They
transport the protein and carbohydrate nutrients absorbed by mucosal
cells after food is digested in the lumen. Lipids are absorbed via
lacteals, tiny structures of the lymphatic system. The blood vessels’
second function is to supply the organs of the alimentary canal with the
nutrients and oxygen needed to drive their cellular processes.
{: #fs-id805517}

Specifically, the more anterior parts of the alimentary canal are
supplied with blood by arteries branching off the aortic arch and
thoracic aorta. Below this point, the alimentary canal is supplied with
blood by arteries branching from the abdominal aorta. The celiac trunk
services the liver, stomach, and duodenum, whereas the superior and
inferior mesenteric arteries supply blood to the remaining small and
large intestines.
{: #fs-id1841649}

The veins that collect nutrient-rich blood from the small intestine
(where most absorption occurs) empty into the hepatic portal system.
This venous network takes the blood into the liver where the nutrients
are either processed or stored for later use. Only then does the blood
drained from the alimentary canal viscera circulate back to the heart.
To appreciate just how demanding the digestive process is on the
cardiovascular system, consider that while you are “resting and
digesting,” about one-fourth of the blood pumped with each heartbeat
enters arteries serving the intestines.
{: #fs-id1857797}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1405644" markdown="1">
# The Peritoneum
{: data-type="title"}

The digestive organs within the abdominal cavity are held in place by
the peritoneum, a broad serous membranous sac made up of squamous
epithelial tissue surrounded by connective tissue. It is composed of two
different regions: the parietal peritoneum, which lines the abdominal
wall, and the visceral peritoneum, which envelopes the abdominal organs
([\[link\]](#fig-ch24_01_03){: .autogenerated-content}). The peritoneal
cavity is the space bounded by the visceral and parietal peritoneal
surfaces. A few milliliters of watery fluid act as a lubricant to
minimize friction between the serosal surfaces of the peritoneum.
{: #fs-id1353864}

<figure id="fig-ch24_01_03">
<div data-type="title">
The Peritoneum
</div>
<figcaption>
A cross-section of the abdomen shows the relationship between abdominal
organs and the peritoneum (darker lines).
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1921463" data-alt="This diagram shows
the cross section of the abdomen. The peritoneum is made distinguishable
from the abdominal organs through darker lines."> ![This diagram shows
the cross section of the abdomen. The peritoneum is made distinguishable
from the abdominal organs through darker
lines.](../resources/2403_The_PeritoneumN.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="420"} </span>
</figure>
<div data-type="note" id="fs-id1377848" class="anatomy disorders" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Disorders of the…
</div>
<span data-type="title">Digestive System: Peritonitis</span>
{: #fs-id1898535}

Inflammation of the peritoneum is called peritonitis. Chemical
peritonitis can develop any time the wall of the alimentary canal is
breached, allowing the contents of the lumen entry into the peritoneal
cavity. For example, when an ulcer perforates the stomach wall, gastric
juices spill into the peritoneal cavity. Hemorrhagic peritonitis occurs
after a ruptured tubal pregnancy or traumatic injury to the liver or
spleen fills the peritoneal cavity with blood. Even more severe
peritonitis is associated with bacterial infections seen with
appendicitis, colonic diverticulitis, and pelvic inflammatory disease
(infection of uterine tubes, usually by sexually transmitted bacteria).
Peritonitis is life threatening and often results in emergency surgery
to correct the underlying problem and intensive antibiotic therapy. When
your great grandparents and even your parents were young, the mortality
from peritonitis was high. Aggressive surgery, improvements in
anesthesia safety, the advance of critical care expertise, and
antibiotics have greatly improved the mortality rate from this
condition. Even so, the mortality rate still ranges from 30 to 40
percent.
{: #fs-id1492664}

</div>
The visceral peritoneum includes multiple large folds that envelope
various abdominal organs, holding them to the dorsal surface of the body
wall. Within these folds are blood vessels, lymphatic vessels, and
nerves that innervate the organs with which they are in contact,
supplying their adjacent organs. The five major peritoneal folds are
described in [\[link\]](#tbl-ch24_02){: .autogenerated-content}. Note
that during fetal development, certain digestive structures, including
the first portion of the small intestine (called the duodenum), the
pancreas, and portions of the large intestine (the ascending and
descending colon, and the rectum) remain completely or partially
posterior to the peritoneum. Thus, the location of these organs is
described as <span data-type="term">retroperitoneal</span>.
{: #fs-id1892430}

<table id="tbl-ch24_02" summary=""><thead> <tr> <th colspan="2">The Five Major Peritoneal Folds</th> </tr> <tr> <th>Fold</th> <th>Description</th> </tr> </thead><tbody> <tr> <td>Greater omentum</td> <td>Apron-like structure that lies superficial to the small intestine and transverse colon; a site of fat deposition in people who are overweight</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Falciform ligament</td> <td>Anchors the liver to the anterior abdominal wall and inferior border of the diaphragm</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Lesser omentum</td> <td>Suspends the stomach from the inferior border of the liver; provides a pathway for structures connecting to the liver</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Mesentery</td> <td>Vertical band of tissue anterior to the lumbar vertebrae and anchoring all of the small intestine except the initial portion (the duodenum)</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Mesocolon</td> <td>Attaches two portions of the large intestine (the transverse and sigmoid colon) to the posterior abdominal wall</td> </tr> </tbody></table>
<div data-type="note" id="fs-id1605026" class="anatomy interactive" data-label="" markdown="1">
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1632458" data-alt="QR Codes
representing a URL"> ![QR Codes representing a
URL](../resources/fooddigestion.png){: data-media-type="image/jpg"
width="120"} </span>
By clicking on this [link][1] you can watch a short video of what
happens to the food you eat, as it passes from your mouth to your
intestine. Along the way, note how the food changes consistency and
form. How does this change in consistency facilitate your gaining
nutrients from food?
{: #fs-id1412176}

</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1412836" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

The digestive system includes the organs of the alimentary canal and
accessory structures. The alimentary canal forms a continuous tube that
is open to the outside environment at both ends. The organs of the
alimentary canal are the mouth, pharynx, esophagus, stomach, small
intestine, and large intestine. The accessory digestive structures
include the teeth, tongue, salivary glands, liver, pancreas, and
gallbladder. The wall of the alimentary canal is composed of four basic
tissue layers: mucosa, submucosa, muscularis, and serosa. The enteric
nervous system provides intrinsic innervation, and the autonomic nervous
system provides extrinsic innervation.
{: #fs-id1616437}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1882819" class="interactive-exercise" markdown="1">
# Interactive Link Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2157107">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1475429" markdown="1">
By clicking on this [link][1], you can watch a short video of what
happens to the food you eat as it passes from your mouth to your
intestine. Along the way, note how the food changes consistency and
form. How does this change in consistency facilitate your gaining
nutrients from food?
{: #fs-id779456}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1965846" data-label="" markdown="1">
Answers may vary.
{: #fs-id1236312}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2103619" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1355942">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2024834" markdown="1">
Which of these organs is not considered an accessory digestive
structure?
{: #fs-id1491685}

1.  mouth
2.  salivary glands
3.  pancreas
4.  liver
{: #fs-id2103981 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1836727" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id1637143}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1424989">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1297233" markdown="1">
Which of the following organs is supported by a layer of adventitia
rather than serosa?
{: #fs-id2032196}

1.  esophagus
2.  stomach
3.  small intestine
4.  large intestine
{: #fs-id1352357 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1384231" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id1240671}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1645617">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1540224" markdown="1">
Which of the following membranes covers the stomach?
{: #fs-id1892401}

1.  falciform ligament
2.  mesocolon
3.  parietal peritoneum
4.  visceral peritoneum
{: #fs-id1954280 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1541372" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id1721426}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1364054" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1649680">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1397260" markdown="1">
Explain how the enteric nervous system supports the digestive system.
What might occur that could result in the autonomic nervous system
having a negative impact on digestion?
{: #fs-id2006193}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1405078" data-label="" markdown="1">
The enteric nervous system helps regulate alimentary canal motility and
the secretion of digestive juices, thus facilitating digestion. If a
person becomes overly anxious, sympathetic innervation of the alimentary
canal is stimulated, which can result in a slowing of digestive
activity.
{: #fs-id1953141}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1898950">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2005097" markdown="1">
What layer of the alimentary canal tissue is capable of helping to
protect the body against disease, and through what mechanism?
{: #fs-id1376302}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1932170" data-label="" markdown="1">
The lamina propria of the mucosa contains lymphoid tissue that makes up
the MALT and responds to pathogens encountered in the alimentary canal.
{: #fs-id1473380}

</div>
</div>
</section>




[1]: http://openstaxcollege.org/l/fooddigestion

