---
title: Introduction
layout: page
---

<?cnx.eoc
  class="summary" title="Chapter Review"?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="interactive-exercise" title="Interactive Link Questions"?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="multiple-choice" title="Review Questions" ?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="free-response" title="Critical Thinking Questions"?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class=&#8221;references&#8221; title=&#8221;References&#8221;?>

<figure id="fig-ch23_00_01" class="splash">
<div data-type="title">
Mountain Climbers
</div>
<figcaption>
The thin air at high elevations can strain the human respiratory system.
(credit: “bortescristian”/flickr.com)
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1250270" data-alt="This photo shows a
group of people climbing a mountain."> ![This photo shows a group of
people climbing a mountain.](../resources/2300_Mountain_Climbers.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="400"} </span>
</figure>
<div data-type="note" id="eip-id1165589658015" class="chapter-objectives" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Chapter Objectives
</div>
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
{: #eip-id1165581121445}

* List the structures of the respiratory system
* List the major functions of the respiratory system
* Outline the forces that allow for air movement into and out of the
  lungs
* Outline the process of gas exchange
* Summarize the process of oxygen and carbon dioxide transport within
  the respiratory system
* Create a flow chart illustrating how respiration is controlled
* Discuss how the respiratory system responds to exercise
* Describe the development of the respiratory system in the embryo
{: #eip-id1165600357483}

</div>
Hold your breath. Really! See how long you can hold your breath as you
continue reading…How long can you do it? Chances are you are feeling
uncomfortable already. A typical human cannot survive without breathing
for more than 3 minutes, and even if you wanted to hold your breath
longer, your autonomic nervous system would take control. This is
because every cell in the body needs to run the oxidative stages of
cellular respiration, the process by which energy is produced in the
form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). For oxidative phosphorylation to
occur, oxygen is used as a reactant and carbon dioxide is released as a
waste product. You may be surprised to learn that although oxygen is a
critical need for cells, it is actually the accumulation of carbon
dioxide that primarily drives your need to breathe. Carbon dioxide is
exhaled and oxygen is inhaled through the respiratory system, which
includes muscles to move air into and out of the lungs, passageways
through which air moves, and microscopic gas exchange surfaces covered
by capillaries. The circulatory system transports gases from the lungs
to tissues throughout the body and vice versa. A variety of diseases can
affect the respiratory system, such as asthma, emphysema, chronic
obstruction pulmonary disorder (COPD), and lung cancer. All of these
conditions affect the gas exchange process and result in labored
breathing and other difficulties.
{: #fs-id1648214}




