---
title: Introduction
layout: page
---

<?cnx.eoc
  class="summary" title="Chapter Review"?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="interactive-exercise" title="Interactive Link Questions"?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="multiple-choice" title="Review Questions" ?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="free-response" title="Critical Thinking Questions"?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class=&#8221;references&#8221; title=&#8221;References&#8221;?>

<figure id="fig-ch24_00_01" class="splash">
<div data-type="title">
Eating Apples
</div>
<figcaption>
Eating may be one of the simple pleasures in life, but digesting even
one apple requires the coordinated work of many organs. (credit:
“Aimanness Photography”/Flickr)
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1854719" data-alt="This photograph
shows two women eating apples."> ![This photograph shows two women
eating apples.](../resources/2400_Women_Eating_Apples.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="600"} </span>
</figure>
<div data-type="note" id="fs-id1171733779515" class="chapter-objectives" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Chapter Objectives
</div>
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
{: #fs-id1171734062942}

* List and describe the functional anatomy of the organs and accessory
  organs of the digestive system
* Discuss the processes and control of ingestion, propulsion, mechanical
  digestion, chemical digestion, absorption, and defecation
* Discuss the roles of the liver, pancreas, and gallbladder in digestion
* Compare and contrast the digestion of the three macronutrients
{: #fs-id1171734018650}

</div>
The digestive system is continually at work, yet people seldom
appreciate the complex tasks it performs in a choreographed biologic
symphony. Consider what happens when you eat an apple. Of course, you
enjoy the apple’s taste as you chew it, but in the hours that follow,
unless something goes amiss and you get a stomachache, you don’t notice
that your digestive system is working. You may be taking a walk or
studying or sleeping, having forgotten all about the apple, but your
stomach and intestines are busy digesting it and absorbing its vitamins
and other nutrients. By the time any waste material is excreted, the
body has appropriated all it can use from the apple. In short, whether
you pay attention or not, the organs of the digestive system perform
their specific functions, allowing you to use the food you eat to keep
you going. This chapter examines the structure and functions of these
organs, and explores the mechanics and chemistry of the digestive
processes.
{: #fs-id2004873}




