---
title: Gas Exchange
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Compare the composition of atmospheric air and alveolar air
* Describe the mechanisms that drive gas exchange
* Discuss the importance of sufficient ventilation and perfusion, and
  how the body adapts when they are insufficient
* Discuss the process of external respiration
* Describe the process of internal respiration

</div>
The purpose of the respiratory system is to perform gas exchange.
Pulmonary ventilation provides air to the alveoli for this gas exchange
process. At the respiratory membrane, where the alveolar and capillary
walls meet, gases move across the membranes, with oxygen entering the
bloodstream and carbon dioxide exiting. It is through this mechanism
that blood is oxygenated and carbon dioxide, the waste product of
cellular respiration, is removed from the body.
{: #fs-id2455114}

<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2295099" markdown="1">
# Gas Exchange
{: data-type="title"}

In order to understand the mechanisms of gas exchange in the lung, it is
important to understand the underlying principles of gases and their
behavior. In addition to Boyle’s law, several other gas laws help to
describe the behavior of gases.
{: #fs-id2765983}

<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id2291323" markdown="1">
## Gas Laws and Air Composition
{: data-type="title"}

Gas molecules exert force on the surfaces with which they are in
contact; this force is called pressure. In natural systems, gases are
normally present as a mixture of different types of molecules. For
example, the atmosphere consists of oxygen, nitrogen, carbon dioxide,
and other gaseous molecules, and this gaseous mixture exerts a certain
pressure referred to as atmospheric pressure ([\[link\]](#tbl-ch23_02){:
.autogenerated-content}). <span data-type="term">Partial pressure</span>
(*P<sub>x</sub>*{: data-effect="italics"}) is the pressure of a single
type of gas in a mixture of gases. For example, in the atmosphere,
oxygen exerts a partial pressure, and nitrogen exerts another partial
pressure, independent of the partial pressure of oxygen
([\[link\]](#fig-ch23_04_01){: .autogenerated-content}). <span
data-type="term">Total pressure</span> is the sum of all the partial
pressures of a gaseous mixture. <span data-type="term">Dalton’s
law</span> describes the behavior of nonreactive gases in a gaseous
mixture and states that a specific gas type in a mixture exerts its own
pressure; thus, the total pressure exerted by a mixture of gases is the
sum of the partial pressures of the gases in the mixture.
{: #fs-id3034386}

<table id="tbl-ch23_02" summary=""><thead> <tr> <th colspan="3">Partial Pressures of Atmospheric Gases</th> </tr> <tr> <th>Gas</th> <th>Percent of total composition</th> <th>Partial pressure <div data-type="newline" data-count="1"><br /></div>(mm Hg)</th> </tr> </thead><tbody> <tr> <td>Nitrogen (N<sub>2</sub>)</td> <td>78.6</td> <td>597.4</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Oxygen (O<sub>2</sub>)</td> <td>20.9</td> <td>158.8</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Water (H<sub>2</sub>O)</td> <td>0.04</td> <td>3.0</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Carbon dioxide (CO<sub>2</sub>)</td> <td>0.004</td> <td>0.3</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Others</td> <td>0.0006</td> <td>0.5</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Total composition/total atmospheric pressure</td> <td>100%</td> <td>760.0</td> </tr> </tbody></table>
<figure id="fig-ch23_04_01">
<div data-type="title">
Partial and Total Pressures of a Gas
</div>
<figcaption>
Partial pressure is the force exerted by a gas. The sum of the partial
pressures of all the gases in a mixture equals the total pressure.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2428812" data-alt="The left panel of
this figure shows a canister of oxygen. The middle panel shows a
canister of nitrogen. The right panel shows a canister containing a
mixture of oxygen and nitrogen. A pressure gauge on each container shows
the pressure exerted by the gas in that container."> ![The left panel of
this figure shows a canister of oxygen. The middle panel shows a
canister of nitrogen. The right panel shows a canister containing a
mixture of oxygen and nitrogen. A pressure gauge on each container shows
the pressure exerted by the gas in that
container.](../resources/2318_Partial_and_Total_Pressure_of_a_Gas.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="420"} </span>
</figure>
Partial pressure is extremely important in predicting the movement of
gases. Recall that gases tend to equalize their pressure in two regions
that are connected. A gas will move from an area where its partial
pressure is higher to an area where its partial pressure is lower. In
addition, the greater the partial pressure difference between the two
areas, the more rapid is the movement of gases.
{: #fs-id2757526}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id2606010" markdown="1">
## Solubility of Gases in Liquids
{: data-type="title"}

<span data-type="term">Henry’s law</span> describes the behavior of
gases when they come into contact with a liquid, such as blood. Henry’s
law states that the concentration of gas in a liquid is directly
proportional to the solubility and partial pressure of that gas. The
greater the partial pressure of the gas, the greater the number of gas
molecules that will dissolve in the liquid. The concentration of the gas
in a liquid is also dependent on the solubility of the gas in the
liquid. For example, although nitrogen is present in the atmosphere,
very little nitrogen dissolves into the blood, because the solubility of
nitrogen in blood is very low. The exception to this occurs in scuba
divers; the composition of the compressed air that divers breathe causes
nitrogen to have a higher partial pressure than normal, causing it to
dissolve in the blood in greater amounts than normal. Too much nitrogen
in the bloodstream results in a serious condition that can be fatal if
not corrected. Gas molecules establish an equilibrium between those
molecules dissolved in liquid and those in air.
{: #fs-id2336375}

The composition of air in the atmosphere and in the alveoli differs. In
both cases, the relative concentration of gases is nitrogen &gt; oxygen
&gt; water vapor &gt; carbon dioxide. The amount of water vapor present
in alveolar air is greater than that in atmospheric air
([\[link\]](#tbl-ch23_03){: .autogenerated-content}). Recall that the
respiratory system works to humidify incoming air, thereby causing the
air present in the alveoli to have a greater amount of water vapor than
atmospheric air. In addition, alveolar air contains a greater amount of
carbon dioxide and less oxygen than atmospheric air. This is no
surprise, as gas exchange removes oxygen from and adds carbon dioxide to
alveolar air. Both deep and forced breathing cause the alveolar air
composition to be changed more rapidly than during quiet breathing. As a
result, the partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide change,
affecting the diffusion process that moves these materials across the
membrane. This will cause oxygen to enter and carbon dioxide to leave
the blood more quickly.
{: #fs-id2075909}

<table id="tbl-ch23_03" summary=""><thead> <tr> <th colspan="3">Composition and Partial Pressures of Alveolar Air</th> </tr> <tr> <th>Gas</th> <th>Percent of total composition</th> <th>Partial pressure <div data-type="newline" data-count="1"><br /></div>(mm Hg)</th> </tr> </thead><tbody> <tr> <td>Nitrogen (N<sub>2</sub>)</td> <td>74.9</td> <td>569</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Oxygen (O<sub>2</sub>)</td> <td>13.7</td> <td>104</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Water (H<sub>2</sub>O)</td> <td>6.2</td> <td>40</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Carbon dioxide (CO<sub>2</sub>)</td> <td>5.2</td> <td>47</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Total composition/total alveolar pressure</td> <td>100%</td> <td>760.0</td> </tr> </tbody></table>
</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id2153704" markdown="1">
## Ventilation and Perfusion
{: data-type="title"}

Two important aspects of gas exchange in the lung are ventilation and
perfusion. <span data-type="term">Ventilation</span> is the movement of
air into and out of the lungs, and perfusion is the flow of blood in the
pulmonary capillaries. For gas exchange to be efficient, the volumes
involved in ventilation and perfusion should be compatible. However,
factors such as regional gravity effects on blood, blocked alveolar
ducts, or disease can cause ventilation and perfusion to be imbalanced.
{: #fs-id2442259}

The partial pressure of oxygen in alveolar air is about 104 mm Hg,
whereas the partial pressure of the oxygenated pulmonary venous blood is
about 100 mm Hg. When ventilation is sufficient, oxygen enters the
alveoli at a high rate, and the partial pressure of oxygen in the
alveoli remains high. In contrast, when ventilation is insufficient, the
partial pressure of oxygen in the alveoli drops. Without the large
difference in partial pressure between the alveoli and the blood, oxygen
does not diffuse efficiently across the respiratory membrane. The body
has mechanisms that counteract this problem. In cases when ventilation
is not sufficient for an alveolus, the body redirects blood flow to
alveoli that are receiving sufficient ventilation. This is achieved by
constricting the pulmonary arterioles that serves the dysfunctional
alveolus, which redirects blood to other alveoli that have sufficient
ventilation. At the same time, the pulmonary arterioles that serve
alveoli receiving sufficient ventilation vasodilate, which brings in
greater blood flow. Factors such as carbon dioxide, oxygen, and pH
levels can all serve as stimuli for adjusting blood flow in the
capillary networks associated with the alveoli.
{: #fs-id2584577}

Ventilation is regulated by the diameter of the airways, whereas
perfusion is regulated by the diameter of the blood vessels. The
diameter of the bronchioles is sensitive to the partial pressure of
carbon dioxide in the alveoli. A greater partial pressure of carbon
dioxide in the alveoli causes the bronchioles to increase their diameter
as will a decreased level of oxygen in the blood supply, allowing carbon
dioxide to be exhaled from the body at a greater rate. As mentioned
above, a greater partial pressure of oxygen in the alveoli causes the
pulmonary arterioles to dilate, increasing blood flow.
{: #fs-id2229918}

</section>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1472312" markdown="1">
# Gas Exchange
{: data-type="title"}

Gas exchange occurs at two sites in the body: in the lungs, where oxygen
is picked up and carbon dioxide is released at the respiratory membrane,
and at the tissues, where oxygen is released and carbon dioxide is
picked up. External respiration is the exchange of gases with the
external environment, and occurs in the alveoli of the lungs. Internal
respiration is the exchange of gases with the internal environment, and
occurs in the tissues. The actual exchange of gases occurs due to simple
diffusion. Energy is not required to move oxygen or carbon dioxide
across membranes. Instead, these gases follow pressure gradients that
allow them to diffuse. The anatomy of the lung maximizes the diffusion
of gases: The respiratory membrane is highly permeable to gases; the
respiratory and blood capillary membranes are very thin; and there is a
large surface area throughout the lungs.
{: #fs-id2271582}

<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1979712" markdown="1">
## External Respiration
{: data-type="title"}

The pulmonary artery carries deoxygenated blood into the lungs from the
heart, where it branches and eventually becomes the capillary network
composed of pulmonary capillaries. These pulmonary capillaries create
the respiratory membrane with the alveoli ([\[link\]](#fig-ch23_04_02){:
.autogenerated-content}). As the blood is pumped through this capillary
network, gas exchange occurs. Although a small amount of the oxygen is
able to dissolve directly into plasma from the alveoli, most of the
oxygen is picked up by erythrocytes (red blood cells) and binds to a
protein called hemoglobin, a process described later in this chapter.
Oxygenated hemoglobin is red, causing the overall appearance of bright
red oxygenated blood, which returns to the heart through the pulmonary
veins. Carbon dioxide is released in the opposite direction of oxygen,
from the blood to the alveoli. Some of the carbon dioxide is returned on
hemoglobin, but can also be dissolved in plasma or is present as a
converted form, also explained in greater detail later in this chapter.
{: #fs-id2005867}

<span data-type="term">External respiration</span> occurs as a function
of partial pressure differences in oxygen and carbon dioxide between the
alveoli and the blood in the pulmonary capillaries.
{: #fs-id2265635}

<figure id="fig-ch23_04_02">
<div data-type="title">
External Respiration
</div>
<figcaption>
In external respiration, oxygen diffuses across the respiratory membrane
from the alveolus to the capillary, whereas carbon dioxide diffuses out
of the capillary into the alveolus.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2759318" data-alt="This figure shows
the pathway in which external respiration takes place. The exchange of
oxygen and carbon dioxide between the alveolus and blood plasma is
detailed."> ![This figure shows the pathway in which external
respiration takes place. The exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide
between the alveolus and blood plasma is
detailed.](../resources/2319_Fig_23.19.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="425"} </span>
</figure>
Although the solubility of oxygen in blood is not high, there is a
drastic difference in the partial pressure of oxygen in the alveoli
versus in the blood of the pulmonary capillaries. This difference is
about 64 mm Hg: The partial pressure of oxygen in the alveoli is about
104 mm Hg, whereas its partial pressure in the blood of the capillary is
about 40 mm Hg. This large difference in partial pressure creates a very
strong pressure gradient that causes oxygen to rapidly cross the
respiratory membrane from the alveoli into the blood.
{: #fs-id2009037}

The partial pressure of carbon dioxide is also different between the
alveolar air and the blood of the capillary. However, the partial
pressure difference is less than that of oxygen, about 5 mm Hg. The
partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the blood of the capillary is
about 45 mm Hg, whereas its partial pressure in the alveoli is about 40
mm Hg. However, the solubility of carbon dioxide is much greater than
that of oxygen—by a factor of about 20—in both blood and alveolar
fluids. As a result, the relative concentrations of oxygen and carbon
dioxide that diffuse across the respiratory membrane are similar.
{: #fs-id2650102}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id2844317" markdown="1">
## Internal Respiration
{: data-type="title"}

<span data-type="term">Internal respiration</span> is gas exchange that
occurs at the level of body tissues ([\[link\]](#fig-ch23_04_03){:
.autogenerated-content}). Similar to external respiration, internal
respiration also occurs as simple diffusion due to a partial pressure
gradient. However, the partial pressure gradients are opposite of those
present at the respiratory membrane. The partial pressure of oxygen in
tissues is low, about 40 mm Hg, because oxygen is continuously used for
cellular respiration. In contrast, the partial pressure of oxygen in the
blood is about 100 mm Hg. This creates a pressure gradient that causes
oxygen to dissociate from hemoglobin, diffuse out of the blood, cross
the interstitial space, and enter the tissue. Hemoglobin that has little
oxygen bound to it loses much of its brightness, so that blood returning
to the heart is more burgundy in color.
{: #fs-id2344495}

Considering that cellular respiration continuously produces carbon
dioxide, the partial pressure of carbon dioxide is lower in the blood
than it is in the tissue, causing carbon dioxide to diffuse out of the
tissue, cross the interstitial fluid, and enter the blood. It is then
carried back to the lungs either bound to hemoglobin, dissolved in
plasma, or in a converted form. By the time blood returns to the heart,
the partial pressure of oxygen has returned to about 40 mm Hg, and the
partial pressure of carbon dioxide has returned to about 45 mm Hg. The
blood is then pumped back to the lungs to be oxygenated once again
during external respiration.
{: #fs-id2017288}

<figure id="fig-ch23_04_03">
<div data-type="title">
Internal Respiration
</div>
<figcaption>
Oxygen diffuses out of the capillary and into cells, whereas carbon
dioxide diffuses out of cells and into the capillary.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1475963" data-alt="This diagram details
the pathway of internal respiration. The exchange of oxygen and carbon
dioxide between a red blood cell and a tissue cell is shown."> ![This
diagram details the pathway of internal respiration. The exchange of
oxygen and carbon dioxide between a red blood cell and a tissue cell is
shown.](../resources/2320_Fig_23.20_NEW_KGX.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="425"} </span>
</figure>
<div data-type="note" id="fs-id2129878" class="anatomy everyday" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Everyday Connection
</div>
<span data-type="title">Hyperbaric Chamber Treatment</span> A type of
device used in some areas of medicine that exploits the behavior of
gases is hyperbaric chamber treatment. A hyperbaric chamber is a unit
that can be sealed and expose a patient to either 100 percent oxygen
with increased pressure or a mixture of gases that includes a higher
concentration of oxygen than normal atmospheric air, also at a higher
partial pressure than the atmosphere. There are two major types of
chambers: monoplace and multiplace. Monoplace chambers are typically for
one patient, and the staff tending to the patient observes the patient
from outside of the chamber ([\[link\]](#fig-ch23_04_04){:
.autogenerated-content}). Some facilities have special monoplace
hyperbaric chambers that allow multiple patients to be treated at once,
usually in a sitting or reclining position, to help ease feelings of
isolation or claustrophobia. Multiplace chambers are large enough for
multiple patients to be treated at one time, and the staff attending
these patients is present inside the chamber. In a multiplace chamber,
patients are often treated with air via a mask or hood, and the chamber
is pressurized.
{: #fs-id2256274}

<figure id="fig-ch23_04_04">
<div data-type="title">
Hyperbaric Chamber
</div>
<figcaption>
(credit: “komunews”/flickr.com)
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1370187" data-alt="This photo shows two
hyperbaric chambers."> ![This photo shows two hyperbaric
chambers.](../resources/2332_Hyperbaric_Chamber.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="380"} </span>
</figure>
Hyperbaric chamber treatment is based on the behavior of gases. As you
recall, gases move from a region of higher partial pressure to a region
of lower partial pressure. In a hyperbaric chamber, the atmospheric
pressure is increased, causing a greater amount of oxygen than normal to
diffuse into the bloodstream of the patient. Hyperbaric chamber therapy
is used to treat a variety of medical problems, such as wound and graft
healing, anaerobic bacterial infections, and carbon monoxide poisoning.
Exposure to and poisoning by carbon monoxide is difficult to reverse,
because hemoglobin’s affinity for carbon monoxide is much stronger than
its affinity for oxygen, causing carbon monoxide to replace oxygen in
the blood. Hyperbaric chamber therapy can treat carbon monoxide
poisoning, because the increased atmospheric pressure causes more oxygen
to diffuse into the bloodstream. At this increased pressure and
increased concentration of oxygen, carbon monoxide is displaced from
hemoglobin. Another example is the treatment of anaerobic bacterial
infections, which are created by bacteria that cannot or prefer not to
live in the presence of oxygen. An increase in blood and tissue levels
of oxygen helps to kill the anaerobic bacteria that are responsible for
the infection, as oxygen is toxic to anaerobic bacteria. For wounds and
grafts, the chamber stimulates the healing process by increasing energy
production needed for repair. Increasing oxygen transport allows cells
to ramp up cellular respiration and thus ATP production, the energy
needed to build new structures.
{: #fs-id1352849}

</div>
</section>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2353222" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

The behavior of gases can be explained by the principles of Dalton’s law
and Henry’s law, both of which describe aspects of gas exchange.
Dalton’s law states that each specific gas in a mixture of gases exerts
force (its partial pressure) independently of the other gases in the
mixture. Henry’s law states that the amount of a specific gas that
dissolves in a liquid is a function of its partial pressure. The greater
the partial pressure of a gas, the more of that gas will dissolve in a
liquid, as the gas moves toward equilibrium. Gas molecules move down a
pressure gradient; in other words, gas moves from a region of high
pressure to a region of low pressure. The partial pressure of oxygen is
high in the alveoli and low in the blood of the pulmonary capillaries.
As a result, oxygen diffuses across the respiratory membrane from the
alveoli into the blood. In contrast, the partial pressure of carbon
dioxide is high in the pulmonary capillaries and low in the alveoli.
Therefore, carbon dioxide diffuses across the respiratory membrane from
the blood into the alveoli. The amount of oxygen and carbon dioxide that
diffuses across the respiratory membrane is similar.
{: #fs-id2296767}

Ventilation is the process that moves air into and out of the alveoli,
and perfusion affects the flow of blood in the capillaries. Both are
important in gas exchange, as ventilation must be sufficient to create a
high partial pressure of oxygen in the alveoli. If ventilation is
insufficient and the partial pressure of oxygen drops in the alveolar
air, the capillary is constricted and blood flow is redirected to
alveoli with sufficient ventilation. External respiration refers to gas
exchange that occurs in the alveoli, whereas internal respiration refers
to gas exchange that occurs in the tissue. Both are driven by partial
pressure differences.
{: #fs-id2175982}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2420907" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2347595">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2060788" markdown="1">
Gas moves from an area of ________ partial pressure to an area of
________ partial pressure.
{: #fs-id2060789}

1.  low; high
2.  low; low
3.  high; high
4.  high; low
{: #fs-id2584638 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1720630" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id1478782}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2228521">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2527379" markdown="1">
When ventilation is not sufficient, which of the following occurs?
{: #fs-id2351604}

1.  The capillary constricts.
2.  The capillary dilates.
3.  The partial pressure of oxygen in the affected alveolus increases.
4.  The bronchioles dilate.
{: #fs-id2015439 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2329004" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id2204683}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2602080">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1882468" markdown="1">
Gas exchange that occurs at the level of the tissues is called ________.
{: #fs-id1882469}

1.  external respiration
2.  interpulmonary respiration
3.  internal respiration
4.  pulmonary ventilation
{: #fs-id2204670 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2125577" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id2483983}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2041910">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2053702" markdown="1">
The partial pressure of carbon dioxide is 45 mm Hg in the blood and 40
mm Hg in the alveoli. What happens to the carbon dioxide?
{: #fs-id2686855}

1.  It diffuses into the blood.
2.  It diffuses into the alveoli.
3.  The gradient is too small for carbon dioxide to diffuse.
4.  It decomposes into carbon and oxygen.
{: #fs-id2065412 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2061847" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id2199278}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1758267" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1653006">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2633943" markdown="1">
Compare and contrast Dalton’s law and Henry’s law.
{: #fs-id2633944}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1918335" data-label="" markdown="1">
Both Dalton’s and Henry’s laws describe the behavior of gases. Dalton’s
law states that any gas in a mixture of gases exerts force as if it were
not in a mixture. Henry’s law states that gas molecules dissolve in a
liquid proportional to their partial pressure.
{: #fs-id2505500}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2577567">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2500206" markdown="1">
A smoker develops damage to several alveoli that then can no longer
function. How does this affect gas exchange?
{: #fs-id2083926}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2105107" data-label="" markdown="1">
The damaged alveoli will have insufficient ventilation, causing the
partial pressure of oxygen in the alveoli to decrease. As a result, the
pulmonary capillaries serving these alveoli will constrict, redirecting
blood flow to other alveoli that are receiving sufficient ventilation.
{: #fs-id1761838}

</div>
</div>
</section>



