---
title: The Lungs
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Describe the overall function of the lung
* Summarize the blood flow pattern associated with the lungs
* Outline the anatomy of the blood supply to the lungs
* Describe the pleura of the lungs and their function

</div>
A major organ of the respiratory system, each <span
data-type="term">lung</span> houses structures of both the conducting
and respiratory zones. The main function of the lungs is to perform the
exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide with air from the atmosphere. To
this end, the lungs exchange respiratory gases across a very large
epithelial surface area—about 70 square meters—that is highly permeable
to gases.
{: #fs-id1401100}

<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2644915" markdown="1">
# Gross Anatomy of the Lungs
{: data-type="title"}

The lungs are pyramid-shaped, paired organs that are connected to the
trachea by the right and left bronchi; on the inferior surface, the
lungs are bordered by the diaphragm. The diaphragm is the flat,
dome-shaped muscle located at the base of the lungs and thoracic cavity.
The lungs are enclosed by the pleurae, which are attached to the
mediastinum. The right lung is shorter and wider than the left lung, and
the left lung occupies a smaller volume than the right. The <span
data-type="term">cardiac notch</span> is an indentation on the surface
of the left lung, and it allows space for the heart
([\[link\]](#fig-ch23_02_01){: .autogenerated-content}). The apex of the
lung is the superior region, whereas the base is the opposite region
near the diaphragm. The costal surface of the lung borders the ribs. The
mediastinal surface faces the midline.
{: #fs-id2627237}

<figure id="fig-ch23_02_01">
<div data-type="title">
Gross Anatomy of the Lungs
</div>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2100891" data-alt="This figure shows
the structure of the lungs with the major parts labeled."> ![This figure
shows the structure of the lungs with the major parts
labeled.](../resources/2312_Gross_Anatomy_of_the_Lungs.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="430"} </span>
</figure>
Each lung is composed of smaller units called lobes. Fissures separate
these lobes from each other. The right lung consists of three lobes: the
superior, middle, and inferior lobes. The left lung consists of two
lobes: the superior and inferior lobes. A bronchopulmonary segment is a
division of a lobe, and each lobe houses multiple bronchopulmonary
segments. Each segment receives air from its own tertiary bronchus and
is supplied with blood by its own artery. Some diseases of the lungs
typically affect one or more bronchopulmonary segments, and in some
cases, the diseased segments can be surgically removed with little
influence on neighboring segments. A pulmonary lobule is a subdivision
formed as the bronchi branch into bronchioles. Each lobule receives its
own large bronchiole that has multiple branches. An interlobular septum
is a wall, composed of connective tissue, which separates lobules from
one another.
{: #fs-id2717313}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2486828" markdown="1">
# Blood Supply and Nervous Innervation of the Lungs
{: data-type="title"}

The blood supply of the lungs plays an important role in gas exchange
and serves as a transport system for gases throughout the body. In
addition, innervation by the both the parasympathetic and sympathetic
nervous systems provides an important level of control through dilation
and constriction of the airway.
{: #fs-id2179965}

<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id2795878" markdown="1">
## Blood Supply
{: data-type="title"}

The major function of the lungs is to perform gas exchange, which
requires blood from the pulmonary circulation. This blood supply
contains deoxygenated blood and travels to the lungs where erythrocytes,
also known as red blood cells, pick up oxygen to be transported to
tissues throughout the body. The <span data-type="term">pulmonary
artery</span> is an artery that arises from the pulmonary trunk and
carries deoxygenated, arterial blood to the alveoli. The pulmonary
artery branches multiple times as it follows the bronchi, and each
branch becomes progressively smaller in diameter. One arteriole and an
accompanying venule supply and drain one pulmonary lobule. As they near
the alveoli, the pulmonary arteries become the pulmonary capillary
network. The pulmonary capillary network consists of tiny vessels with
very thin walls that lack smooth muscle fibers. The capillaries branch
and follow the bronchioles and structure of the alveoli. It is at this
point that the capillary wall meets the alveolar wall, creating the
respiratory membrane. Once the blood is oxygenated, it drains from the
alveoli by way of multiple pulmonary veins, which exit the lungs through
the <span data-type="term">hilum</span>.
{: #fs-id2144132}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id2003529" markdown="1">
## Nervous Innervation
{: data-type="title"}

Dilation and constriction of the airway are achieved through nervous
control by the parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous systems. The
parasympathetic system causes <span
data-type="term">bronchoconstriction</span>, whereas the sympathetic
nervous system stimulates <span data-type="term">bronchodilation</span>.
Reflexes such as coughing, and the ability of the lungs to regulate
oxygen and carbon dioxide levels, also result from this autonomic
nervous system control. Sensory nerve fibers arise from the vagus nerve,
and from the second to fifth thoracic ganglia. The <span
data-type="term">pulmonary plexus</span> is a region on the lung root
formed by the entrance of the nerves at the hilum. The nerves then
follow the bronchi in the lungs and branch to innervate muscle fibers,
glands, and blood vessels.
{: #fs-id2292208}

</section>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2293350" markdown="1">
# Pleura of the Lungs
{: data-type="title"}

Each lung is enclosed within a cavity that is surrounded by the pleura.
The pleura (plural = pleurae) is a serous membrane that surrounds the
lung. The right and left pleurae, which enclose the right and left
lungs, respectively, are separated by the mediastinum. The pleurae
consist of two layers. The <span data-type="term">visceral pleura</span>
is the layer that is superficial to the lungs, and extends into and
lines the lung fissures ([\[link\]](#fig-ch23_02_02){:
.autogenerated-content}). In contrast, the <span
data-type="term">parietal pleura</span> is the outer layer that connects
to the thoracic wall, the mediastinum, and the diaphragm. The visceral
and parietal pleurae connect to each other at the hilum. The <span
data-type="term">pleural cavity</span> is the space between the visceral
and parietal layers.
{: #fs-id2346435}

<figure id="fig-ch23_02_02">
<div data-type="title">
Parietal and Visceral Pleurae of the Lungs
</div>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2577415" data-alt="This figure shows
the lungs and the chest wall, which protects the lungs, in the left
panel. In the right panel, a magnified image shows the pleural cavity
and a pleural sac."> ![This figure shows the lungs and the chest wall,
which protects the lungs, in the left panel. In the right panel, a
magnified image shows the pleural cavity and a pleural
sac.](../resources/2313_The_Lung_Pleurea.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="440"} </span>
</figure>
The pleurae perform two major functions: They produce pleural fluid and
create cavities that separate the major organs. <span
data-type="term">Pleural fluid</span> is secreted by mesothelial cells
from both pleural layers and acts to lubricate their surfaces. This
lubrication reduces friction between the two layers to prevent trauma
during breathing, and creates surface tension that helps maintain the
position of the lungs against the thoracic wall. This adhesive
characteristic of the pleural fluid causes the lungs to enlarge when the
thoracic wall expands during ventilation, allowing the lungs to fill
with air. The pleurae also create a division between major organs that
prevents interference due to the movement of the organs, while
preventing the spread of infection.
{: #fs-id2078585}

<div data-type="note" id="fs-id2239873" class="anatomy everyday" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Everyday Connection
</div>
<span data-type="title">The Effects of Second-Hand Tobacco Smoke</span>
The burning of a tobacco cigarette creates multiple chemical compounds
that are released through mainstream smoke, which is inhaled by the
smoker, and through sidestream smoke, which is the smoke that is given
off by the burning cigarette. Second-hand smoke, which is a combination
of sidestream smoke and the mainstream smoke that is exhaled by the
smoker, has been demonstrated by numerous scientific studies to cause
disease. At least 40 chemicals in sidestream smoke have been identified
that negatively impact human health, leading to the development of
cancer or other conditions, such as immune system dysfunction, liver
toxicity, cardiac arrhythmias, pulmonary edema, and neurological
dysfunction. Furthermore, second-hand smoke has been found to harbor at
least 250 compounds that are known to be toxic, carcinogenic, or both.
Some major classes of carcinogens in second-hand smoke are polyaromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs), N-nitrosamines, aromatic amines, formaldehyde, and
acetaldehyde.
{: #fs-id2285338}

Tobacco and second-hand smoke are considered to be carcinogenic.
Exposure to second-hand smoke can cause lung cancer in individuals who
are not tobacco users themselves. It is estimated that the risk of
developing lung cancer is increased by up to 30 percent in nonsmokers
who live with an individual who smokes in the house, as compared to
nonsmokers who are not regularly exposed to second-hand smoke. Children
are especially affected by second-hand smoke. Children who live with an
individual who smokes inside the home have a larger number of lower
respiratory infections, which are associated with hospitalizations, and
higher risk of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS). Second-hand smoke in
the home has also been linked to a greater number of ear infections in
children, as well as worsening symptoms of asthma.
{: #fs-id2573116}

</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2773018" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

The lungs are the major organs of the respiratory system and are
responsible for performing gas exchange. The lungs are paired and
separated into lobes; The left lung consists of two lobes, whereas the
right lung consists of three lobes. Blood circulation is very important,
as blood is required to transport oxygen from the lungs to other tissues
throughout the body. The function of the pulmonary circulation is to aid
in gas exchange. The pulmonary artery provides deoxygenated blood to the
capillaries that form respiratory membranes with the alveoli, and the
pulmonary veins return newly oxygenated blood to the heart for further
transport throughout the body. The lungs are innervated by the
parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous systems, which coordinate the
bronchodilation and bronchoconstriction of the airways. The lungs are
enclosed by the pleura, a membrane that is composed of visceral and
parietal pleural layers. The space between these two layers is called
the pleural cavity. The mesothelial cells of the pleural membrane create
pleural fluid, which serves as both a lubricant (to reduce friction
during breathing) and as an adhesive to adhere the lungs to the thoracic
wall (to facilitate movement of the lungs during ventilation).
{: #fs-id2638784}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2347939" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2614454">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2093821" markdown="1">
Which of the following structures separates the lung into lobes?
{: #fs-id2281888}

1.  mediastinum
2.  fissure
3.  root
4.  pleura
{: #fs-id2485319 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2788562" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id1395248}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2112277">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2472434" markdown="1">
A section of the lung that receives its own tertiary bronchus is called
the ________.
{: #fs-id2674512}

1.  bronchopulmonary segment
2.  pulmonary lobule
3.  interpulmonary segment
4.  respiratory segment
{: #fs-id2382569 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2106350" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id2512188}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2321808">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1372139" markdown="1">
The ________ circulation picks up oxygen for cellular use and drops off
carbon dioxide for removal from the body.
{: #fs-id2413018}

1.  pulmonary
2.  interlobular
3.  respiratory
4.  bronchial
{: #fs-id2417327 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2094591" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id1987866}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2269266">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2337076" markdown="1">
The pleura that surrounds the lungs consists of two layers, the
________.
{: #fs-id1479291}

1.  visceral and parietal pleurae.
2.  mediastinum and parietal pleurae.
3.  visceral and mediastinum pleurae.
4.  none of the above
{: #fs-id2623395 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2327084" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id2591132}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2417383" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1475566">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2363620" markdown="1">
Compare and contrast the right and left lungs.
{: #fs-id2826054}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1534841" data-label="" markdown="1">
The right and left lungs differ in size and shape to accommodate other
organs that encroach on the thoracic region. The right lung consists of
three lobes and is shorter than the left lung, due to the position of
the liver underneath it. The left lung consist of two lobes and is
longer and narrower than the right lung. The left lung has a concave
region on the mediastinal surface called the cardiac notch that allows
space for the heart.
{: #fs-id1574461}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2518753">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2527459" markdown="1">
Why are the pleurae not damaged during normal breathing?
{: #fs-id2155454}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2071267" data-label="" markdown="1">
There is a cavity, called the pleural cavity, between the parietal and
visceral layers of the pleura. Mesothelial cells produce and secrete
pleural fluid into the pleural cavity that acts as a lubricant.
Therefore, as you breathe, the pleural fluid prevents the two layers of
the pleura from rubbing against each other and causing damage due to
friction.
{: #fs-id2410074}

</div>
</div>
</section>



