---
title: Introduction
layout: page
---

<?cnx.eoc
  class="summary" title="Chapter Review"?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="interactive-exercise" title="Interactive Link Questions"?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="multiple-choice" title="Review Questions" ?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="free-response" title="Critical Thinking Questions"?>

<figure id="fig-ch13_00_01" class="splash">
<div data-type="title">
Human Nervous System
</div>
<figcaption>
The ability to balance like an acrobat combines functions throughout the
nervous system. The central and peripheral divisions coordinate control
of the body using the senses of balance, body position, and touch on the
soles of the feet. (credit: Rhett Sutphin)
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1146438" data-alt="This photograph
shows a man balancing on a tightrope."> ![This photograph shows a man
balancing on a tightrope.](../resources/1300_Human_Nervous_System.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="600"} </span>
</figure>
<div data-type="note" id="eip-897" class="chapter-objectives" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Chapter Objectives
</div>
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
{: #eip-id1168150591252}

* Relate the developmental processes of the embryonic nervous system to
  the adult structures
* Name the major regions of the adult nervous system
* Locate regions of the cerebral cortex on the basis of anatomical
  landmarks common to all human brains
* Describe the regions of the spinal cord in cross-section
* List the cranial nerves in order of anatomical location and provide
  the central and peripheral connections
* List the spinal nerves by vertebral region and by which nerve plexus
  each supplies
{: #eip-id1168149551179}

</div>
The nervous system is responsible for controlling much of the body, both
through somatic (voluntary) and autonomic (involuntary) functions. The
structures of the nervous system must be described in detail to
understand how many of these functions are possible. There is a
physiological concept known as localization of function that states that
certain structures are specifically responsible for prescribed
functions. It is an underlying concept in all of anatomy and physiology,
but the nervous system illustrates the concept very well.
{: #fs-id692340}

Fresh, unstained nervous tissue can be described as gray or white
matter, and within those two types of tissue it can be very hard to see
any detail. However, as specific regions and structures have been
described, they were related to specific functions. Understanding these
structures and the functions they perform requires a detailed
description of the anatomy of the nervous system, delving deep into what
the central and peripheral structures are.
{: #fs-id1150380}

The place to start this study of the nervous system is the beginning of
the individual human life, within the womb. The embryonic development of
the nervous system allows for a simple framework on which progressively
more complicated structures can be built. With this framework in place,
a thorough investigation of the nervous system is possible.
{: #fs-id1956082}




