---
title: Introduction
layout: page
---

<?cnx.eoc
  class="summary" title="Chapter Review"?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="interactive-exercise" title="Interactive Link Questions"?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="multiple-choice" title="Review Questions" ?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="free-response" title="Critical Thinking Questions"?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class=&#8221;references&#8221; title=&#8221;References&#8221;?>

<figure id="fig-ch12_00_01" class="splash">
<div data-type="title">
Robotic Arms Playing Foosball
</div>
<figcaption>
As the neural circuitry of the nervous system has become more fully
understood and robotics more sophisticated, it is now possible to
integrate technology with the body and restore abilities following
traumatic events. At some point in the future, will this type of
technology lead to the ability to augment our nervous systems? (credit:
U.S. Army/Wikimedia Commons)
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1059371" data-alt="This photo shows a
person playing foosball. The person has had both of their lower arms
amputated. The left arm was replaced with a replica of a human hand and
the right arm was replaced with a manipulator that resembles a pair of
tongs."> ![This photo shows a person playing foosball. The person has
had both of their lower arms amputated. The left arm was replaced with a
replica of a human hand and the right arm was replaced with a
manipulator that resembles a pair of
tongs.](../resources/1200_Robotic_Arms.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="500"} </span>
</figure>
<div data-type="note" id="eip-933" class="chapter-objectives" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Chapter Objectives
</div>
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
{: #eip-id1171733659671}

* Name the major divisions of the nervous system, both anatomical and
  functional
* Describe the functional and structural differences between gray matter
  and white matter structures
* Name the parts of the multipolar neuron in order of polarity
* List the types of glial cells and assign each to the proper division
  of the nervous system, along with their function(s)
* Distinguish the major functions of the nervous system: sensation,
  integration, and response
* Describe the components of the membrane that establish the resting
  membrane potential
* Describe the changes that occur to the membrane that result in the
  action potential
* Explain the differences between types of graded potentials
* Categorize the major neurotransmitters by chemical type and effect
{: #eip-id1171733898006}

</div>
The nervous system is a very complex organ system. In Peter D. Kramer’s
book *Listening to Prozac*{: data-effect="italics"}, a pharmaceutical
researcher is quoted as saying, “If the human brain were simple enough
for us to understand, we would be too simple to understand it” (1994).
That quote is from the early 1990s; in the two decades since, progress
has continued at an amazing rate within the scientific disciplines of
neuroscience. It is an interesting conundrum to consider that the
complexity of the nervous system may be too complex for it (that is, for
us) to completely unravel. But our current level of understanding is
probably nowhere close to that limit.
{: #fs-id1681701}

One easy way to begin to understand the structure of the nervous system
is to start with the large divisions and work through to a more in-depth
understanding. In other chapters, the finer details of the nervous
system will be explained, but first looking at an overview of the system
will allow you to begin to understand how its parts work together. The
focus of this chapter is on nervous (neural) tissue, both its structure
and its function. But before you learn about that, you will see a big
picture of the system—actually, a few big pictures.
{: #fs-id2104642}




