---
title: The Function of Nervous Tissue
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Distinguish the major functions of the nervous system: sensation,
  integration, and response
* List the sequence of events in a simple sensory receptor–motor
  response pathway

</div>
Having looked at the components of nervous tissue, and the basic anatomy
of the nervous system, next comes an understanding of how nervous tissue
is capable of communicating within the nervous system. Before getting to
the nuts and bolts of how this works, an illustration of how the
components come together will be helpful. An example is summarized in
[\[link\]](#fig-ch12_03_01){: .autogenerated-content}.
{: #fs-id1864222}

<figure id="fig-ch12_03_01">
<div data-type="title">
Testing the Water
</div>
<figcaption>
(1) The sensory neuron has endings in the skin that sense a stimulus
such as water temperature. The strength of the signal that starts here
is dependent on the strength of the stimulus. (2) The graded potential
from the sensory endings, if strong enough, will initiate an action
potential at the initial segment of the axon (which is immediately
adjacent to the sensory endings in the skin). (3) The axon of the
peripheral sensory neuron enters the spinal cord and contacts another
neuron in the gray matter. The contact is a synapse where another graded
potential is caused by the release of a chemical signal from the axon
terminals. (4) An action potential is initiated at the initial segment
of this neuron and travels up the sensory pathway to a region of the
brain called the thalamus. Another synapse passes the information along
to the next neuron. (5) The sensory pathway ends when the signal reaches
the cerebral cortex. (6) After integration with neurons in other parts
of the cerebral cortex, a motor command is sent from the precentral
gyrus of the frontal cortex. (7) The upper motor neuron sends an action
potential down to the spinal cord. The target of the upper motor neuron
is the dendrites of the lower motor neuron in the gray matter of the
spinal cord. (8) The axon of the lower motor neuron emerges from the
spinal cord in a nerve and connects to a muscle through a neuromuscular
junction to cause contraction of the target muscle.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1491974" data-alt="This diagram shows
the complete pathway a nerve impulse takes when a person tests the
temperature of shower water with their hand. First, a sensory nerve
ending in the index finger sends a nerve impulse to the spinal cord. A
cross section of one segment of the vertebrae is shown from a superior
view. The sensory nerve connected to the nerve ending is located in the
dorsal root ganglion. The nerve ending is a dendrite of the sensory
neuron, as it also has an axon that synapses with an interneuron. The
interneuron then synapses with a second interneuron in the thalamus.
This second interneuron synapses with brain tissue in the cerebral
cortex, allowing conscious perception of the water temperature. The
brain then initiates a motor command by stimulating an upper motor
neuron in the cerebral cortex. The axon of the upper motor neuron
extends all the way to the spinal cord, where it synapses with a lower
motor neuron in the gray matter of the spinal cord. The impulse then
travels down the lower motor neuron back to the hand where it synapses
with the skeletal muscles of the hand. This triggers the muscle
contractions that turn the dials of the shower to adjust the water
temperature."> ![This diagram shows the complete pathway a nerve impulse
takes when a person tests the temperature of shower water with their
hand. First, a sensory nerve ending in the index finger sends a nerve
impulse to the spinal cord. A cross section of one segment of the
vertebrae is shown from a superior view. The sensory nerve connected to
the nerve ending is located in the dorsal root ganglion. The nerve
ending is a dendrite of the sensory neuron, as it also has an axon that
synapses with an interneuron. The interneuron then synapses with a
second interneuron in the thalamus. This second interneuron synapses
with brain tissue in the cerebral cortex, allowing conscious perception
of the water temperature. The brain then initiates a motor command by
stimulating an upper motor neuron in the cerebral cortex. The axon of
the upper motor neuron extends all the way to the spinal cord, where it
synapses with a lower motor neuron in the gray matter of the spinal
cord. The impulse then travels down the lower motor neuron back to the
hand where it synapses with the skeletal muscles of the hand. This
triggers the muscle contractions that turn the dials of the shower to
adjust the water
temperature.](../resources/1212_Sensory_Neuron_Test_Water.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="450"} </span>
</figure>
Imagine you are about to take a shower in the morning before going to
school. You have turned on the faucet to start the water as you prepare
to get in the shower. After a few minutes, you expect the water to be a
temperature that will be comfortable to enter. So you put your hand out
into the spray of water. What happens next depends on how your nervous
system interacts with the stimulus of the water temperature and what you
do in response to that stimulus.
{: #fs-id2036069}

Found in the skin of your fingers or toes is a type of sensory receptor
that is sensitive to temperature, called a <span
data-type="term">thermoreceptor</span>. When you place your hand under
the shower ([\[link\]](#fig-ch12_03_02){: .autogenerated-content}), the
cell membrane of the thermoreceptors changes its electrical state
(voltage). The amount of change is dependent on the strength of the
stimulus (how hot the water is). This is called a <span
data-type="term">graded potential</span>. If the stimulus is strong, the
voltage of the cell membrane will change enough to generate an
electrical signal that will travel down the axon. You have learned about
this type of signaling before, with respect to the interaction of nerves
and muscles at the neuromuscular junction. The voltage at which such a
signal is generated is called the <span
data-type="term">threshold</span>, and the resulting electrical signal
is called an <span data-type="term">action potential</span>. In this
example, the action potential travels—a process known as <span
data-type="term">propagation</span>—along the axon from the axon hillock
to the axon terminals and into the synaptic end bulbs. When this signal
reaches the end bulbs, it causes the release of a signaling molecule
called a <span data-type="term">neurotransmitter</span>.
{: #fs-id2081554}

<figure id="fig-ch12_03_02">
<div data-type="title">
The Sensory Input
</div>
<figcaption>
Receptors in the skin sense the temperature of the water.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2248401" data-alt="This diagram shows
the first step of the previous figure. A hand is placed under flowing
water, causing a sensory receptor in the index finger to send a nerve
impulse down the arm, to the spinal cord."> ![This diagram shows the
first step of the previous figure. A hand is placed under flowing water,
causing a sensory receptor in the index finger to send a nerve impulse
down the arm, to the spinal
cord.](../resources/1213_Sensory_Input_Test_Water.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="380"} </span>
</figure>
The neurotransmitter diffuses across the short distance of the synapse
and binds to a receptor protein of the target neuron. When the molecular
signal binds to the receptor, the cell membrane of the target neuron
changes its electrical state and a new graded potential begins. If that
graded potential is strong enough to reach threshold, the second neuron
generates an action potential at its axon hillock. The target of this
neuron is another neuron in the <span data-type="term">thalamus</span>
of the brain, the part of the CNS that acts as a relay for sensory
information. At another synapse, neurotransmitter is released and binds
to its receptor. The thalamus then sends the sensory information to the
<span data-type="term">cerebral cortex</span>, the outermost layer of
gray matter in the brain, where conscious perception of that water
temperature begins.
{: #fs-id2104719}

Within the cerebral cortex, information is processed among many neurons,
integrating the stimulus of the water temperature with other sensory
stimuli, with your emotional state (you just aren\'t ready to wake up;
the bed is calling to you), memories (perhaps of the lab notes you have
to study before a quiz). Finally, a plan is developed about what to do,
whether that is to turn the temperature up, turn the whole shower off
and go back to bed, or step into the shower. To do any of these things,
the cerebral cortex has to send a command out to your body to move
muscles ([\[link\]](#fig-ch12_03_03){: .autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id1521110}

<figure id="fig-ch12_03_03">
<div data-type="title">
The Motor Response
</div>
<figcaption>
On the basis of the sensory input and the integration in the CNS, a
motor response is formulated and executed.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1284412" data-alt="This diagram shows
the later steps of Figure 12.13. A hand is placed under flowing water.
The axon of a motor neuron travels down the forearm and then branches as
it reaches the hand. Each branch synapses with a different skeletal
muscle in the hand. The synapse between the axon branches and the muscle
is a neuromuscular junction. An impulse travelling down the motor neuron
will cause the skeletal muscles to contract, resulting in muscle
movement. In this case, the movement results in the person adjusting the
faucet dials to change the temperature of the water."> ![This diagram
shows the later steps of Figure 12.13. A hand is placed under flowing
water. The axon of a motor neuron travels down the forearm and then
branches as it reaches the hand. Each branch synapses with a different
skeletal muscle in the hand. The synapse between the axon branches and
the muscle is a neuromuscular junction. An impulse travelling down the
motor neuron will cause the skeletal muscles to contract, resulting in
muscle movement. In this case, the movement results in the person
adjusting the faucet dials to change the temperature of the
water.](../resources/1214_Motor_Response_Test_Water.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="380"} </span>
</figure>
A region of the cortex is specialized for sending signals down to the
spinal cord for movement. The <span data-type="term">upper motor
neuron</span> is in this region, called the <span
data-type="term">precentral gyrus of the frontal cortex</span>, which
has an axon that extends all the way down the spinal cord. At the level
of the spinal cord at which this axon makes a synapse, a graded
potential occurs in the cell membrane of a <span data-type="term">lower
motor neuron</span>. This second motor neuron is responsible for causing
muscle fibers to contract. In the manner described in the chapter on
muscle tissue, an action potential travels along the motor neuron axon
into the periphery. The axon terminates on muscle fibers at the
neuromuscular junction. Acetylcholine is released at this specialized
synapse, which causes the muscle action potential to begin, following a
large potential known as an end plate potential. When the lower motor
neuron excites the muscle fiber, it contracts. All of this occurs in a
fraction of a second, but this story is the basis of how the nervous
system functions.
{: #fs-id1860007}

<div data-type="note" id="fs-id2328671" class="anatomy career" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Career Connections
</div>
<span data-type="title">Neurophysiologist</span> Understanding how the
nervous system works could be a driving force in your career. Studying
neurophysiology is a very rewarding path to follow. It means that there
is a lot of work to do, but the rewards are worth the effort.
{: #fs-id1639960}

The career path of a research scientist can be straightforward: college,
graduate school, postdoctoral research, academic research position at a
university. A Bachelor’s degree in science will get you started, and for
neurophysiology that might be in biology, psychology, computer science,
engineering, or neuroscience. But the real specialization comes in
graduate school. There are many different programs out there to study
the nervous system, not just neuroscience itself. Most graduate programs
are doctoral, meaning that a Master’s degree is not part of the work.
These are usually considered five-year programs, with the first two
years dedicated to course work and finding a research mentor, and the
last three years dedicated to finding a research topic and pursuing that
with a near single-mindedness. The research will usually result in a few
publications in scientific journals, which will make up the bulk of a
doctoral dissertation. After graduating with a Ph.D., researchers will
go on to find specialized work called a postdoctoral fellowship within
established labs. In this position, a researcher starts to establish
their own research career with the hopes of finding an academic position
at a research university.
{: #fs-id969443}

Other options are available if you are interested in how the nervous
system works. Especially for neurophysiology, a medical degree might be
more suitable so you can learn about the clinical applications of
neurophysiology and possibly work with human subjects. An academic
career is not a necessity. Biotechnology firms are eager to find
motivated scientists ready to tackle the tough questions about how the
nervous system works so that therapeutic chemicals can be tested on some
of the most challenging disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease or
Parkinson’s disease, or spinal cord injury.
{: #fs-id1455946}

Others with a medical degree and a specialization in neuroscience go on
to work directly with patients, diagnosing and treating mental
disorders. You can do this as a psychiatrist, a neuropsychologist, a
neuroscience nurse, or a neurodiagnostic technician, among other
possible career paths.
{: #fs-id1304243}

</div>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1524411" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

Sensation starts with the activation of a sensory ending, such as the
thermoreceptor in the skin sensing the temperature of the water. The
sensory endings in the skin initiate an electrical signal that travels
along the sensory axon within a nerve into the spinal cord, where it
synapses with a neuron in the gray matter of the spinal cord. The
temperature information represented in that electrical signal is passed
to the next neuron by a chemical signal that diffuses across the small
gap of the synapse and initiates a new electrical signal in the target
cell. That signal travels through the sensory pathway to the brain,
passing through the thalamus, where conscious perception of the water
temperature is made possible by the cerebral cortex. Following
integration of that information with other cognitive processes and
sensory information, the brain sends a command back down to the spinal
cord to initiate a motor response by controlling a skeletal muscle. The
motor pathway is composed of two cells, the upper motor neuron and the
lower motor neuron. The upper motor neuron has its cell body in the
cerebral cortex and synapses on a cell in the gray matter of the spinal
cord. The lower motor neuron is that cell in the gray matter of the
spinal cord and its axon extends into the periphery where it synapses
with a skeletal muscle in a neuromuscular junction.
{: #fs-id1860019}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1966931" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1830454">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1977636" markdown="1">
If a thermoreceptor is sensitive to temperature sensations, what would a
chemoreceptor be sensitive to?
{: #fs-id1859725}

1.  light
2.  sound
3.  molecules
4.  vibration
{: #fs-id1527677 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1559610" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id2248700}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1862585">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1321389" markdown="1">
Which of these locations is where the greatest level of integration is
taking place in the example of testing the temperature of the shower?
{: #fs-id1953618}

1.  skeletal muscle
2.  spinal cord
3.  thalamus
4.  cerebral cortex
{: #fs-id1864167 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1942662" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id1488938}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1533571">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1111823" markdown="1">
How long does all the signaling through the sensory pathway, within the
central nervous system, and through the motor command pathway take?
{: #fs-id1532009}

1.  1 to 2 minutes
2.  1 to 2 seconds
3.  fraction of a second
4.  varies with graded potential
{: #fs-id1120248 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1530628" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id1149957}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1805294">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1282786" markdown="1">
What is the target of an upper motor neuron?
{: #fs-id1804744}

1.  cerebral cortex
2.  lower motor neuron
3.  skeletal muscle
4.  thalamus
{: #fs-id1501281 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1672289" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id1183736}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1434485" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1491206">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1613647" markdown="1">
Sensory fibers, or pathways, are referred to as “afferent.” Motor
fibers, or pathways, are referred to as “efferent.” What can you infer
about the meaning of these two terms (afferent and efferent) in a
structural or anatomical context?
{: #fs-id1739430}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1543673" data-label="" markdown="1">
Afferent means “toward,” as in sensory information traveling from the
periphery into the CNS. Efferent means “away from,” as in motor commands
that travel from the brain down the spinal cord and out into the
periphery.
{: #fs-id813535}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1318756">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id969395" markdown="1">
If a person has a motor disorder and cannot move their arm voluntarily,
but their muscles have tone, which motor neuron—upper or lower—is
probably affected? Explain why.
{: #fs-id1082687}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1543336" data-label="" markdown="1">
The upper motor neuron would be affected because it is carrying the
command from the brain down.
{: #fs-id1490633}

</div>
</div>
</section>



