---
title: "The Adaptive Immune Response: T lymphocytes and Their Functional Types"
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Explain the advantages of the adaptive immune response over the innate
  immune response
* List the various characteristics of an antigen
* Describe the types of T cell antigen receptors
* Outline the steps of T cell development
* Describe the major T cell types and their functions

</div>
Innate immune responses (and early induced responses) are in many cases
ineffective at completely controlling pathogen growth. However, they
slow pathogen growth and allow time for the adaptive immune response to
strengthen and either control or eliminate the pathogen. The innate
immune system also sends signals to the cells of the adaptive immune
system, guiding them in how to attack the pathogen. Thus, these are the
two important arms of the immune response.
{: #fs-id2151282}

<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1886329" markdown="1">
# The Benefits of the Adaptive Immune Response
{: data-type="title"}

The specificity of the adaptive immune response—its ability to
specifically recognize and make a response against a wide variety of
pathogens—is its great strength. Antigens, the small chemical groups
often associated with pathogens, are recognized by receptors on the
surface of B and T lymphocytes. The adaptive immune response to these
antigens is so versatile that it can respond to nearly any pathogen.
This increase in specificity comes because the adaptive immune response
has a unique way to develop as many as 10<sup>11</sup>, or 100 trillion,
different receptors to recognize nearly every conceivable pathogen. How
could so many different types of antibodies be encoded? And what about
the many specificities of T cells? There is not nearly enough DNA in a
cell to have a separate gene for each specificity. The mechanism was
finally worked out in the 1970s and 1980s using the new tools of
molecular genetics
{: #fs-id2240905}

<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1240741" markdown="1">
## Primary Disease and Immunological Memory
{: data-type="title"}

The immune system’s first exposure to a pathogen is called a <span
data-type="term">primary adaptive response</span>. Symptoms of a first
infection, called primary disease, are always relatively severe because
it takes time for an initial adaptive immune response to a pathogen to
become effective.
{: #fs-id1431507}

Upon re-exposure to the same pathogen, a secondary adaptive immune
response is generated, which is stronger and faster that the primary
response. The <span data-type="term">secondary adaptive response</span>
often eliminates a pathogen before it can cause significant tissue
damage or any symptoms. Without symptoms, there is no disease, and the
individual is not even aware of the infection. This secondary response
is the basis of <span data-type="term">immunological memory</span>,
which protects us from getting diseases repeatedly from the same
pathogen. By this mechanism, an individual’s exposure to pathogens early
in life spares the person from these diseases later in life.
{: #fs-id2096565}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1401092" markdown="1">
## Self Recognition
{: data-type="title"}

A third important feature of the adaptive immune response is its ability
to distinguish between self-antigens, those that are normally present in
the body, and foreign antigens, those that might be on a potential
pathogen. As T and B cells mature, there are mechanisms in place that
prevent them from recognizing self-antigen, preventing a damaging immune
response against the body. These mechanisms are not 100 percent
effective, however, and their breakdown leads to autoimmune diseases,
which will be discussed later in this chapter.
{: #fs-id1938490}

</section>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1549116" markdown="1">
# T Cell-Mediated Immune Responses
{: data-type="title"}

The primary cells that control the adaptive immune response are the
lymphocytes, the T and B cells. T cells are particularly important, as
they not only control a multitude of immune responses directly, but also
control B cell immune responses in many cases as well. Thus, many of the
decisions about how to attack a pathogen are made at the T cell level,
and knowledge of their functional types is crucial to understanding the
functioning and regulation of adaptive immune responses as a whole.
{: #fs-id1761695}

T lymphocytes recognize antigens based on a two-chain protein receptor.
The most common and important of these are the alpha-beta T cell
receptors ([\[link\]](#fig-ch22_03_01){: .autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id2990170}

<figure id="fig-ch22_03_01">
<div data-type="title">
Alpha-beta T Cell Receptor
</div>
<figcaption>
Notice the constant and variable regions of each chain, anchored by the
transmembrane region.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1854477" data-alt="This figure shows
the alpha beta T cell receptor in the plasma membrane."> ![This figure
shows the alpha beta T cell receptor in the plasma
membrane.](../resources/2215_Alpha-Beta_T_Cell_Receptor.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="300"} </span>
</figure>
There are two chains in the T cell receptor, and each chain consists of
two domains. The <span data-type="term">variable region domain</span> is
furthest away from the T cell membrane and is so named because its amino
acid sequence varies between receptors. In contrast, the <span
data-type="term">constant region domain</span> has less variation. The
differences in the amino acid sequences of the variable domains are the
molecular basis of the diversity of antigens the receptor can recognize.
Thus, the antigen-binding site of the receptor consists of the terminal
ends of both receptor chains, and the amino acid sequences of those two
areas combine to determine its antigenic specificity. Each T cell
produces only one type of receptor and thus is specific for a single
particular antigen.
{: #fs-id2450960}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2202983" markdown="1">
# Antigens
{: data-type="title"}

Antigens on pathogens are usually large and complex, and consist of many
antigenic determinants. An <span data-type="term">antigenic
determinant</span> (epitope) is one of the small regions within an
antigen to which a receptor can bind, and antigenic determinants are
limited by the size of the receptor itself. They usually consist of six
or fewer amino acid residues in a protein, or one or two sugar moieties
in a carbohydrate antigen. Antigenic determinants on a carbohydrate
antigen are usually less diverse than on a protein antigen. Carbohydrate
antigens are found on bacterial cell walls and on red blood cells (the
ABO blood group antigens). Protein antigens are complex because of the
variety of three-dimensional shapes that proteins can assume, and are
especially important for the immune responses to viruses and worm
parasites. It is the interaction of the shape of the antigen and the
complementary shape of the amino acids of the antigen-binding site that
accounts for the chemical basis of specificity
([\[link\]](#fig-ch22_03_02){: .autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id1933220}

<figure id="fig-ch22_03_02">
<div data-type="title">
Antigenic Determinants
</div>
<figcaption>
A typical protein antigen has multiple antigenic determinants, shown by
the ability of T cells with three different specificities to bind to
different parts of the same antigen.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2336707" data-alt="This figure shows
three T cells and the antigenic determinants in the center."> ![This
figure shows three T cells and the antigenic determinants in the
center.](../resources/2214_Antigenic_Determinants.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="480"} </span>
</figure>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1855302" markdown="1">
## Antigen Processing and Presentation
{: data-type="title"}

Although [\[link\]](#fig-ch22_03_02){: .autogenerated-content} shows T
cell receptors interacting with antigenic determinants directly, the
mechanism that T cells use to recognize antigens is, in reality, much
more complex. T cells do not recognize free-floating or cell-bound
antigens as they appear on the surface of the pathogen. They only
recognize antigen on the surface of specialized cells called
antigen-presenting cells. Antigens are internalized by these cells.
<span data-type="term">Antigen processing</span> is a mechanism that
enzymatically cleaves the antigen into smaller pieces. The antigen
fragments are then brought to the cell’s surface and associated with a
specialized type of antigen-presenting protein known as a <span
data-type="term">major histocompatibility complex (MHC)</span> molecule.
The MHC is the cluster of genes that encode these antigen-presenting
molecules. The association of the antigen fragments with an MHC molecule
on the surface of a cell is known as <span data-type="term">antigen
presentation</span> and results in the recognition of antigen by a T
cell. This association of antigen and MHC occurs inside the cell, and it
is the complex of the two that is brought to the surface. The
peptide-binding cleft is a small indentation at the end of the MHC
molecule that is furthest away from the cell membrane; it is here that
the processed fragment of antigen sits. MHC molecules are capable of
presenting a variety of antigens, depending on the amino acid sequence,
in their peptide-binding clefts. It is the combination of the MHC
molecule and the fragment of the original peptide or carbohydrate that
is actually physically recognized by the T cell receptor
([\[link\]](#fig-ch22_03_03){: .autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id2237988}

<figure id="fig-ch22_03_03">
<div data-type="title">
Antigen Processing and Presentation
</div>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2340336" data-alt="This figure shows
how an antigen-presenting cell deals with a pathogen or extracellular
antigen. The different steps are shown with text callouts."> ![This
figure shows how an antigen-presenting cell deals with a pathogen or
extracellular antigen. The different steps are shown with text
callouts.](../resources/2216_Antigen_Processing_and_Presentation.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="560"} </span>
</figure>
Two distinct types of MHC molecules, <span data-type="term">MHC class
I</span> and <span data-type="term">MHC class II</span>, play roles in
antigen presentation. Although produced from different genes, they both
have similar functions. They bring processed antigen to the surface of
the cell via a transport vesicle and present the antigen to the T cell
and its receptor. Antigens from different classes of pathogens, however,
use different MHC classes and take different routes through the cell to
get to the surface for presentation. The basic mechanism, though, is the
same. Antigens are processed by digestion, are brought into the
endomembrane system of the cell, and then are expressed on the surface
of the antigen-presenting cell for antigen recognition by a T cell.
Intracellular antigens are typical of viruses, which replicate inside
the cell, and certain other intracellular parasites and bacteria. These
antigens are processed in the cytosol by an enzyme complex known as the
proteasome and are then brought into the endoplasmic reticulum by the
transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP) system, where they
interact with class I MHC molecules and are eventually transported to
the cell surface by a transport vesicle.
{: #fs-id2097029}

Extracellular antigens, characteristic of many bacteria, parasites, and
fungi that do not replicate inside the cell’s cytoplasm, are brought
into the endomembrane system of the cell by receptor-mediated
endocytosis. The resulting vesicle fuses with vesicles from the Golgi
complex, which contain pre-formed MHC class II molecules. After fusion
of these two vesicles and the association of antigen and MHC, the new
vesicle makes its way to the cell surface.
{: #fs-id2521249}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id2346014" markdown="1">
## Professional Antigen-presenting Cells
{: data-type="title"}

Many cell types express class I molecules for the presentation of
intracellular antigens. These MHC molecules may then stimulate a
cytotoxic T cell immune response, eventually destroying the cell and the
pathogen within. This is especially important when it comes to the most
common class of intracellular pathogens, the virus. Viruses infect
nearly every tissue of the body, so all these tissues must necessarily
be able to express class I MHC or no T cell response can be made.
{: #fs-id2242628}

On the other hand, class II MHC molecules are expressed only on the
cells of the immune system, specifically cells that affect other arms of
the immune response. Thus, these cells are called “professional”
antigen-presenting cells to distinguish them from those that bear class
I MHC. The three types of professional antigen presenters are
macrophages, dendritic cells, and B cells ([\[link\]](#tbl-ch22_04){:
.autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id2254832}

Macrophages stimulate T cells to release cytokines that enhance
phagocytosis. Dendritic cells also kill pathogens by phagocytosis (see
[\[link\]](#fig-ch22_03_03){: .autogenerated-content}), but their major
function is to bring antigens to regional draining lymph nodes. The
lymph nodes are the locations in which most T cell responses against
pathogens of the interstitial tissues are mounted. Macrophages are found
in the skin and in the lining of mucosal surfaces, such as the
nasopharynx, stomach, lungs, and intestines. B cells may also present
antigens to T cells, which are necessary for certain types of antibody
responses, to be covered later in this chapter.
{: #fs-id1850528}

<table id="tbl-ch22_04" summary=""><thead> <tr><th colspan="4">Classes of Antigen-presenting Cells</th></tr> <tr> <th>MHC</th> <th>Cell type</th> <th>Phagocytic?</th> <th>Function</th> </tr> </thead><tbody> <tr> <td>Class I</td> <td>Many</td> <td>No</td> <td>Stimulates cytotoxic T cell immune response</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Class II</td> <td>Macrophage</td> <td>Yes</td> <td>Stimulates phagocytosis and presentation at primary infection site</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Class II</td> <td>Dendritic</td> <td>Yes, in tissues</td> <td>Brings antigens to regional lymph nodes</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Class II</td> <td>B cell</td> <td>Yes, internalizes surface Ig and antigen</td> <td>Stimulates antibody secretion by B cells</td> </tr> </tbody></table>
</section>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2226552" markdown="1">
# T Cell Development and Differentiation
{: data-type="title"}

The process of eliminating T cells that might attack the cells of one’s
own body is referred to as <span data-type="term">T cell
tolerance</span>. While thymocytes are in the cortex of the thymus, they
are referred to as “double negatives,” meaning that they do not bear the
CD4 or CD8 molecules that you can use to follow their pathways of
differentiation ([\[link\]](#fig-ch22_03_04){: .autogenerated-content}).
In the cortex of the thymus, they are exposed to cortical epithelial
cells. In a process known as <span data-type="term">positive
selection</span>, double-negative thymocytes bind to the MHC molecules
they observe on the thymic epithelia, and the MHC molecules of “self”
are selected. This mechanism kills many thymocytes during T cell
differentiation. In fact, only two percent of the thymocytes that enter
the thymus leave it as mature, functional T cells.
{: #fs-id1961110}

<figure id="fig-ch22_03_04">
<div data-type="title">
Differentiation of T Cells within the Thymus
</div>
<figcaption>
Thymocytes enter the thymus and go through a series of developmental
stages that ensures both function and tolerance before they leave and
become functional components of the adaptive immune response.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1261073" data-alt="This multipart
figure shows the different steps in the differentiation of a thymocyte
into T cells. For each step of the process, accompanying text details
the steps in the process. The right panel of this image shows the
location of the different steps in the process."> ![This multipart
figure shows the different steps in the differentiation of a thymocyte
into T cells. For each step of the process, accompanying text details
the steps in the process. The right panel of this image shows the
location of the different steps in the
process.](../resources/2217_Differentiation_of_T_Cells_Within_the_Thymus.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="500"} </span>
</figure>
Later, the cells become double positives that express both CD4 and CD8
markers and move from the cortex to the junction between the cortex and
medulla. It is here that negative selection takes place. In <span
data-type="term">negative selection</span>, self-antigens are brought
into the thymus from other parts of the body by professional
antigen-presenting cells. The T cells that bind to these self-antigens
are selected for negatively and are killed by apoptosis. In summary, the
only T cells left are those that can bind to MHC molecules of the body
with foreign antigens presented on their binding clefts, preventing an
attack on one’s own body tissues, at least under normal circumstances.
Tolerance can be broken, however, by the development of an autoimmune
response, to be discussed later in this chapter.
{: #fs-id1893005}

The cells that leave the thymus become single positives, expressing
either CD4 or CD8, but not both (see [\[link\]](#fig-ch22_03_04){:
.autogenerated-content}). The CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells will bind to class
II MHC and the CD8<sup>+</sup> cells will bind to class I MHC. The
discussion that follows explains the functions of these molecules and
how they can be used to differentiate between the different T cell
functional types.
{: #fs-id1918079}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2316169" markdown="1">
# Mechanisms of T Cell-mediated Immune Responses
{: data-type="title"}

Mature T cells become activated by recognizing processed foreign antigen
in association with a self-MHC molecule and begin dividing rapidly by
mitosis. This proliferation of T cells is called <span
data-type="term">clonal expansion</span> and is necessary to make the
immune response strong enough to effectively control a pathogen. How
does the body select only those T cells that are needed against a
specific pathogen? Again, the specificity of a T cell is based on the
amino acid sequence and the three-dimensional shape of the
antigen-binding site formed by the variable regions of the two chains of
the T cell receptor ([\[link\]](#fig-ch22_03_05){:
.autogenerated-content}). <span data-type="term">Clonal selection</span>
is the process of antigen binding only to those T cells that have
receptors specific to that antigen. Each T cell that is activated has a
specific receptor “hard-wired” into its DNA, and all of its progeny will
have identical DNA and T cell receptors, forming clones of the original
T cell.
{: #fs-id2264083}

<figure id="fig-ch22_03_05">
<div data-type="title">
Clonal Selection and Expansion of T Lymphocytes
</div>
<figcaption>
Stem cells differentiate into T cells with specific receptors, called
clones. The clones with receptors specific for antigens on the pathogen
are selected for and expanded.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2328136" data-alt="This flowchart shows
the process in which a na&#xEF;ve T cell become activated T cells in the
left part of the pathway and memory cells in the right part of the
pathway."> ![This flowchart shows the process in which a na&#xEF;ve T
cell become activated T cells in the left part of the pathway and memory
cells in the right part of the
pathway.](../resources/2218_Clonal_Selection_and_Expansion_of_T_Lymphocytes.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="450"} </span>
</figure>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1483975" markdown="1">
# Clonal Selection and Expansion
{: data-type="title"}

The clonal selection theory was proposed by Frank Burnet in the 1950s.
However, the term clonal selection is not a complete description of the
theory, as clonal expansion goes hand in glove with the selection
process. The main tenet of the theory is that a typical individual has a
multitude (10<sup>11</sup>) of different types of T cell clones based on
their receptors. In this use, a <span data-type="term">clone</span> is a
group of lymphocytes that share the same <span data-type="term">antigen
receptor</span>. Each clone is necessarily present in the body in low
numbers. Otherwise, the body would not have room for lymphocytes with so
many specificities.
{: #fs-id2057490}

Only those clones of lymphocytes whose receptors are activated by the
antigen are stimulated to proliferate. Keep in mind that most antigens
have multiple antigenic determinants, so a T cell response to a typical
antigen involves a polyclonal response. A <span
data-type="term">polyclonal response</span> is the stimulation of
multiple T cell clones. Once activated, the selected clones increase in
number and make many copies of each cell type, each clone with its
unique receptor. By the time this process is complete, the body will
have large numbers of specific lymphocytes available to fight the
infection (see [\[link\]](#fig-ch22_03_05){: .autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id2018127}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1416790" markdown="1">
# The Cellular Basis of Immunological Memory
{: data-type="title"}

As already discussed, one of the major features of an adaptive immune
response is the development of immunological memory.
{: #fs-id2305884}

During a primary adaptive immune response, both <span
data-type="term">memory T cells</span> and <span
data-type="term">effector T cells</span> are generated. Memory T cells
are long-lived and can even persist for a lifetime. Memory cells are
primed to act rapidly. Thus, any subsequent exposure to the pathogen
will elicit a very rapid T cell response. This rapid, secondary adaptive
response generates large numbers of effector T cells so fast that the
pathogen is often overwhelmed before it can cause any symptoms of
disease. This is what is meant by immunity to a disease. The same
pattern of primary and secondary immune responses occurs in B cells and
the antibody response, as will be discussed later in the chapter.
{: #fs-id2203025}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1645676" markdown="1">
# T Cell Types and their Functions
{: data-type="title"}

In the discussion of T cell development, you saw that mature T cells
express either the CD4 marker or the CD8 marker, but not both. These
markers are cell adhesion molecules that keep the T cell in close
contact with the antigen-presenting cell by directly binding to the MHC
molecule (to a different part of the molecule than does the antigen).
Thus, T cells and antigen-presenting cells are held together in two
ways: by CD4 or CD8 attaching to MHC and by the T cell receptor binding
to antigen ([\[link\]](#fig-ch22_03_06){: .autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id2227827}

<figure id="fig-ch22_03_06">
<div data-type="title">
Pathogen Presentation
</div>
<figcaption>
(a) CD4 is associated with helper and regulatory T cells. An
extracellular pathogen is processed and presented in the binding cleft
of a class II MHC molecule, and this interaction is strengthened by the
CD4 molecule. (b) CD8 is associated with cytotoxic T cells. An
intracellular pathogen is presented by a class I MHC molecule, and CD8
interacts with it.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2175272" data-alt="This figure shows
the different steps in processing an extracellular pathogen."> ![This
figure shows the different steps in processing an extracellular
pathogen.](../resources/2219_Pathogen_Presentation.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="380"} </span>
</figure>
Although the correlation is not 100 percent, CD4-bearing T cells are
associated with helper functions and CD8-bearing T cells are associated
with cytotoxicity. These functional distinctions based on CD4 and CD8
markers are useful in defining the function of each type.
{: #fs-id2141981}

<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1898856" markdown="1">
## Helper T Cells and their Cytokines
{: data-type="title"}

<span data-type="term">Helper T cells (Th)</span>, bearing the CD4
molecule, function by secreting cytokines that act to enhance other
immune responses. There are two classes of Th cells, and they act on
different components of the immune response. These cells are not
distinguished by their surface molecules but by the characteristic set
of cytokines they secrete ([\[link\]](#tbl-ch22_05){:
.autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id1978621}

<span data-type="term">Th1 cells</span> are a type of helper T cell that
secretes cytokines that regulate the immunological activity and
development of a variety of cells, including macrophages and other types
of T cells.
{: #fs-id2009455}

<span data-type="term">Th2 cells</span>, on the other hand, are
cytokine-secreting cells that act on B cells to drive their
differentiation into plasma cells that make antibody. In fact, T cell
help is required for antibody responses to most protein antigens, and
these are called T cell-dependent antigens.
{: #fs-id2200448}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1640359" markdown="1">
## Cytotoxic T cells
{: data-type="title"}

<span data-type="term">Cytotoxic T cells (Tc)</span> are T cells that
kill target cells by inducing apoptosis using the same mechanism as NK
cells. They either express Fas ligand, which binds to the fas molecule
on the target cell, or act by using perforins and granzymes contained in
their cytoplasmic granules. As was discussed earlier with NK cells,
killing a virally infected cell before the virus can complete its
replication cycle results in the production of no infectious particles.
As more Tc cells are developed during an immune response, they overwhelm
the ability of the virus to cause disease. In addition, each Tc cell can
kill more than one target cell, making them especially effective. Tc
cells are so important in the antiviral immune response that some
speculate that this was the main reason the adaptive immune response
evolved in the first place.
{: #fs-id2459849}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1370208" markdown="1">
## Regulatory T Cells
{: data-type="title"}

<span data-type="term">Regulatory T cells (Treg)</span>, or suppressor T
cells, are the most recently discovered of the types listed here, so
less is understood about them. In addition to CD4, they bear the
molecules CD25 and FOXP3. Exactly how they function is still under
investigation, but it is known that they suppress other T cell immune
responses. This is an important feature of the immune response, because
if clonal expansion during immune responses were allowed to continue
uncontrolled, these responses could lead to autoimmune diseases and
other medical issues.
{: #fs-id2070653}

Not only do T cells directly destroy pathogens, but they regulate nearly
all other types of the adaptive immune response as well, as evidenced by
the functions of the T cell types, their surface markers, the cells they
work on, and the types of pathogens they work against (see
[\[link\]](#tbl-ch22_05){: .autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id1397991}

<table id="tbl-ch22_05" summary=""><thead> <tr> <th colspan="7">Functions of T Cell Types and Their Cytokines</th> </tr> <tr> <th>T cell</th> <th>Main target</th> <th>Function</th> <th>Pathogen</th> <th>Surface marker</th> <th>MHC</th> <th>Cytokines or mediators</th> </tr> </thead><tbody> <tr> <td>Tc</td> <td>Infected cells</td> <td>Cytotoxicity</td> <td>Intracellular</td> <td>CD8</td> <td>Class I</td> <td>Perforins, granzymes, and fas ligand</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Th1</td> <td>Macrophage</td> <td>Helper inducer</td> <td>Extracellular</td> <td>CD4</td> <td>Class II</td> <td>Interferon-γ and TGF-β</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Th2</td> <td>B cell</td> <td>Helper inducer</td> <td>Extracellular</td> <td>CD4</td> <td>Class II</td> <td>IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, and others</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Treg</td> <td>Th cell</td> <td>Suppressor</td> <td>None</td> <td>CD4, CD25</td> <td>?</td> <td>TGF-β and IL-10</td> </tr> </tbody></table>
</section>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2019838" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

T cells recognize antigens with their antigen receptor, a complex of two
protein chains on their surface. They do not recognize self-antigens,
however, but only processed antigen presented on their surfaces in a
binding groove of a major histocompatibility complex molecule. T cells
develop in the thymus, where they learn to use self-MHC molecules to
recognize only foreign antigens, thus making them tolerant to
self-antigens. There are several functional types of T lymphocytes, the
major ones being helper, regulatory, and cytotoxic T cells.
{: #fs-id2142367}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1748841" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Chapter
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2337856">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1479584" markdown="1">
T cells that secrete cytokines that help antibody responses are called
________.
{: #fs-id1479586}

1.  Th1
2.  Th2
3.  regulatory T cells
4.  thymocytes
{: #fs-id2142222 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1365011" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id1425437}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1950416">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2264263" markdown="1">
The taking in of antigen and digesting it for later presentation is
called ________.
{: #fs-id1404448}

1.  antigen presentation
2.  antigen processing
3.  endocytosis
4.  exocytosis
{: #fs-id1240454 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1909264" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id1897936}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2443791">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1481178" markdown="1">
Why is clonal expansion so important?
{: #fs-id1481179}

1.  to select for specific cells
2.  to secrete cytokines
3.  to kill target cells
4.  to increase the numbers of specific cells
{: #fs-id1485074 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2017546" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id1890724}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2169042">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1707473" markdown="1">
The elimination of self-reactive thymocytes is called ________.
{: #fs-id2341162}

1.  positive selection.
2.  negative selection.
3.  tolerance.
4.  clonal selection.
{: #fs-id1978216 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2110635" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id2002997}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2293814">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2023719" markdown="1">
Which type of T cell is most effective against viruses?
{: #fs-id2023720}

1.  Th1
2.  Th2
3.  cytotoxic T cells
4.  regulatory T cells
{: #fs-id2229536 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1352233" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id2242057}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2336562" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2033426">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1289140" markdown="1">
Describe the processing and presentation of an intracellular antigen.
{: #fs-id1849563}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2068457" data-label="" markdown="1">
The antigen is digested by the proteasome, brought into the endoplasmic
reticulum by the TAP transporter system, where it binds to class I MHC
molecules. These are taken to the cell surface by transport vesicles.
{: #fs-id2143706}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2316133">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2228202" markdown="1">
Describe clonal selection and expansion.
{: #fs-id1478440}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2269348" data-label="" markdown="1">
Antigen-specific clones are stimulated as their antigen receptor binds
to antigen. They are then activated and proliferate, expanding their
numbers. The result is a large number of antigen-specific lymphocytes.
{: #fs-id1708290}

</div>
</div>
</section>



