---
title: Organs with Secondary Endocrine Functions
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Identify the organs with a secondary endocrine function, the hormone
  they produce, and its effects

</div>
In your study of anatomy and physiology, you have already encountered a
few of the many organs of the body that have secondary endocrine
functions. Here, you will learn about the hormone-producing activities
of the heart, gastrointestinal tract, kidneys, skeleton, adipose tissue,
skin, and thymus.
{: #fs-id1478156}

<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2045320" markdown="1">
# Heart
{: data-type="title"}

When the body experiences an increase in blood volume or pressure, the
cells of the heart’s atrial wall stretch. In response, specialized cells
in the wall of the atria produce and secrete the peptide hormone <span
data-type="term">atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP)</span>. ANP signals
the kidneys to reduce sodium reabsorption, thereby decreasing the amount
of water reabsorbed from the urine filtrate and reducing blood volume.
Other actions of ANP include the inhibition of renin secretion and the
initiation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) and
vasodilation. Therefore, ANP aids in decreasing blood pressure, blood
volume, and blood sodium levels.
{: #fs-id1297530}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1884267" markdown="1">
# Gastrointestinal Tract
{: data-type="title"}

The endocrine cells of the GI tract are located in the mucosa of the
stomach and small intestine. Some of these hormones are secreted in
response to eating a meal and aid in digestion. An example of a hormone
secreted by the stomach cells is gastrin, a peptide hormone secreted in
response to stomach distention that stimulates the release of
hydrochloric acid. Secretin is a peptide hormone secreted by the small
intestine as acidic chyme (partially digested food and fluid) moves from
the stomach. It stimulates the release of bicarbonate from the pancreas,
which buffers the acidic chyme, and inhibits the further secretion of
hydrochloric acid by the stomach. Cholecystokinin (CCK) is another
peptide hormone released from the small intestine. It promotes the
secretion of pancreatic enzymes and the release of bile from the
gallbladder, both of which facilitate digestion. Other hormones produced
by the intestinal cells aid in glucose metabolism, such as by
stimulating the pancreatic beta cells to secrete insulin, reducing
glucagon secretion from the alpha cells, or enhancing cellular
sensitivity to insulin.
{: #fs-id1635461}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1689764" markdown="1">
# Kidneys
{: data-type="title"}

The kidneys participate in several complex endocrine pathways and
produce certain hormones. A decline in blood flow to the kidneys
stimulates them to release the enzyme renin, triggering the
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone (RAAS) system, and stimulating the
reabsorption of sodium and water. The reabsorption increases blood flow
and blood pressure. The kidneys also play a role in regulating blood
calcium levels through the production of calcitriol from vitamin
D<sub>3</sub>, which is released in response to the secretion of
parathyroid hormone (PTH). In addition, the kidneys produce the hormone
<span data-type="term">erythropoietin (EPO)</span> in response to low
oxygen levels. EPO stimulates the production of red blood cells
(erythrocytes) in the bone marrow, thereby increasing oxygen delivery to
tissues. You may have heard of EPO as a performance-enhancing drug (in a
synthetic form).
{: #fs-id1389903}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1488542" markdown="1">
# Skeleton
{: data-type="title"}

Although bone has long been recognized as a target for hormones, only
recently have researchers recognized that the skeleton itself produces
at least two hormones. Fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23) is produced
by bone cells in response to increased blood levels of vitamin
D<sub>3</sub> or phosphate. It triggers the kidneys to inhibit the
formation of calcitriol from vitamin D<sub>3</sub> and to increase
phosphorus excretion. Osteocalcin, produced by osteoblasts, stimulates
the pancreatic beta cells to increase insulin production. It also acts
on peripheral tissues to increase their sensitivity to insulin and their
utilization of glucose.
{: #fs-id1474592}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1405010" markdown="1">
# Adipose Tissue
{: data-type="title"}

Adipose tissue produces and secretes several hormones involved in lipid
metabolism and storage. One important example is <span
data-type="term">leptin</span>, a protein manufactured by adipose cells
that circulates in amounts directly proportional to levels of body fat.
Leptin is released in response to food consumption and acts by binding
to brain neurons involved in energy intake and expenditure. Binding of
leptin produces a feeling of satiety after a meal, thereby reducing
appetite. It also appears that the binding of leptin to brain receptors
triggers the sympathetic nervous system to regulate bone metabolism,
increasing deposition of cortical bone. Adiponectin—another hormone
synthesized by adipose cells—appears to reduce cellular insulin
resistance and to protect blood vessels from inflammation and
atherosclerosis. Its levels are lower in people who are obese, and rise
following weight loss.
{: #fs-id1907952}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1976472" markdown="1">
# Skin
{: data-type="title"}

The skin functions as an endocrine organ in the production of the
inactive form of vitamin D<sub>3</sub>, cholecalciferol. When
cholesterol present in the epidermis is exposed to ultraviolet
radiation, it is converted to cholecalciferol, which then enters the
blood. In the liver, cholecalciferol is converted to an intermediate
that travels to the kidneys and is further converted to calcitriol, the
active form of vitamin D<sub>3</sub>. Vitamin D is important in a
variety of physiological processes, including intestinal calcium
absorption and immune system function. In some studies, low levels of
vitamin D have been associated with increased risks of cancer, severe
asthma, and multiple sclerosis. Vitamin D deficiency in children causes
rickets, and in adults, osteomalacia—both of which are characterized by
bone deterioration.
{: #fs-id1400782}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1648884" markdown="1">
# Thymus
{: data-type="title"}

The <span data-type="term">thymus</span> is an organ of the immune
system that is larger and more active during infancy and early
childhood, and begins to atrophy as we age. Its endocrine function is
the production of a group of hormones called <span
data-type="term">thymosins</span> that contribute to the development and
differentiation of T lymphocytes, which are immune cells. Although the
role of thymosins is not yet well understood, it is clear that they
contribute to the immune response. Thymosins have been found in tissues
other than the thymus and have a wide variety of functions, so the
thymosins cannot be strictly categorized as thymic hormones.
{: #fs-id1906303}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id810687" markdown="1">
# Liver
{: data-type="title"}

The liver is responsible for secreting at least four important hormones
or hormone precursors: insulin-like growth factor (somatomedin),
angiotensinogen, thrombopoetin, and hepcidin. Insulin-like growth
factor-1 is the immediate stimulus for growth in the body, especially of
the bones. Angiotensinogen is the precursor to angiotensin, mentioned
earlier, which increases blood pressure. Thrombopoetin stimulates the
production of the blood’s platelets. Hepcidins block the release of iron
from cells in the body, helping to regulate iron homeostasis in our body
fluids. The major hormones of these other organs are summarized in
[\[link\]](#tbl-ch18_08){: .autogenerated-content}.
{: #fs-id1861549}

<table id="tbl-ch18_08" summary=""><thead> <tr> <th colspan="3">Organs with Secondary Endocrine Functions and Their Major Hormones</th> </tr> <tr> <th>Organ</th> <th>Major hormones</th> <th>Effects</th> </tr> </thead><tbody> <tr> <td>Heart</td> <td>Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP)</td> <td>Reduces blood volume, blood pressure, and Na<sup>+</sup> concentration</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Gastrointestinal tract</td> <td>Gastrin, secretin, and cholecystokinin</td> <td>Aid digestion of food and buffering of stomach acids</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Gastrointestinal tract</td> <td>Glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide (GIP) and glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1)</td> <td>Stimulate beta cells of the pancreas to release insulin</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Kidneys</td> <td>Renin</td> <td>Stimulates release of aldosterone</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Kidneys</td> <td>Calcitriol</td> <td>Aids in the absorption of Ca<sup>2+</sup><sup /></td> </tr> <tr> <td>Kidneys</td> <td>Erythropoietin</td> <td>Triggers the formation of red blood cells in the bone marrow</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Skeleton</td> <td>FGF23</td> <td>Inhibits production of calcitriol and increases phosphate excretion</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Skeleton</td> <td>Osteocalcin</td> <td>Increases insulin production</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Adipose tissue</td> <td>Leptin</td> <td>Promotes satiety signals in the brain</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Adipose tissue</td> <td>Adiponectin</td> <td>Reduces insulin resistance</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Skin</td> <td>Cholecalciferol</td> <td>Modified to form vitamin D</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Thymus (and other organs)</td> <td>Thymosins</td> <td>Among other things, aids in the development of T lymphocytes of the immune system</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Liver</td> <td>Insulin-like growth factor-1</td> <td>Stimulates bodily growth</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Liver</td> <td>Angiotensinogen</td> <td>Raises blood pressure</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Liver</td> <td>Thrombopoetin</td> <td>Causes increase in platelets</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Liver</td> <td>Hepcidin</td> <td>Blocks release of iron into body fluids</td> </tr> </tbody></table>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1765238" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

Some organs have a secondary endocrine function. For example, the walls
of the atria of the heart produce the hormone atrial natriuretic peptide
(ANP), the gastrointestinal tract produces the hormones gastrin,
secretin, and cholecystokinin, which aid in digestion, and the kidneys
produce erythropoietin (EPO), which stimulates the formation of red
blood cells. Even bone, adipose tissue, and the skin have secondary
endocrine functions.
{: #fs-id1918548}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1645242" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1897050">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1836611" markdown="1">
The walls of the atria produce which hormone?
{: #fs-id1928552}

1.  cholecystokinin
2.  atrial natriuretic peptide
3.  renin
4.  calcitriol
{: #fs-id1907525 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1410874" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id1765479}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1765862">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1584118" markdown="1">
The end result of the RAAS is to ________.
{: #fs-id2012081}

1.  reduce blood volume
2.  increase blood glucose
3.  reduce blood pressure
4.  increase blood pressure
{: #fs-id2005097 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1492152" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id1966424}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1641299">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1422089" markdown="1">
Athletes may take synthetic EPO to boost their ________.
{: #fs-id1845563}

1.  blood calcium levels
2.  secretion of growth hormone
3.  blood oxygen levels
4.  muscle mass
{: #fs-id1766162 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1899513" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id1836943}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1933534">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1652553" markdown="1">
Hormones produced by the thymus play a role in the ________.
{: #fs-id1989022}

1.  development of T cells
2.  preparation of the body for childbirth
3.  regulation of appetite
4.  release of hydrochloric acid in the stomach
{: #fs-id1899619 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1748091" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id1853742}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1277782" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1706649">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1548440" markdown="1">
Summarize the role of GI tract hormones following a meal.
{: #fs-id1400390}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1898605" data-label="" markdown="1">
The presence of food in the GI tract stimulates the release of hormones
that aid in digestion. For example, gastrin is secreted in response to
stomach distention and causes the release of hydrochloric acid in the
stomach. Secretin is secreted when acidic chyme enters the small
intestine, and stimulates the release of pancreatic bicarbonate. In the
presence of fat and protein in the duodenum, CCK stimulates the release
of pancreatic digestive enzymes and bile from the gallbladder. Other GI
tract hormones aid in glucose metabolism and other functions.
{: #fs-id1760751}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1858844">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1374531" markdown="1">
Compare and contrast the thymus gland in infancy and adulthood.
{: #fs-id1640617}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1370960" data-label="" markdown="1">
The thymus gland is important for the development and maturation of T
cells. During infancy and early childhood, the thymus gland is large and
very active, as the immune system is still developing. During adulthood,
the thymus gland atrophies because the immune system is already
developed.
{: #fs-id1408324}

</div>
</div>
</section>



