---
title: Introduction
layout: page
---

<?cnx.eoc
  class="summary" title="Chapter Review"?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="interactive-exercise" title="Interactive Link Questions"?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="multiple-choice" title="Review Questions" ?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="free-response" title="Critical Thinking Questions"?>

<figure id="fig-ch20_00_01" class="splash">
<div data-type="title">
Human Heart
</div>
<figcaption>
This artist’s conception of the human heart suggests a powerful
engine—not inappropriate for a muscular pump that keeps the body
continually supplied with blood. (credit: Patrick J. Lynch)
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2001437" data-alt="This photo shows a
human heart."> ![This photo shows a human
heart.](../resources/2000_Human_Heart_Photo.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="500"} </span>
</figure>
<div data-type="note" id="fs-id1169723562101" class="chapter-objectives" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Chapter Objectives
</div>
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
{: #fs-id1169710929010}

* Identify and describe the interior and exterior parts of the human
  heart
* Describe the path of blood through the cardiac circuits
* Describe the size, shape, and location of the heart
* Compare cardiac muscle to skeletal and smooth muscle
* Explain the cardiac conduction system
* Describe the process and purpose of an electrocardiogram
* Explain the cardiac cycle
* Calculate cardiac output
* Describe the effects of exercise on cardiac output and heart rate
* Name the centers of the brain that control heart rate and describe
  their function
* Identify other factors affecting heart rate
* Describe fetal heart development
{: #fs-id1169715901379}

</div>
In this chapter, you will explore the remarkable pump that propels the
blood into the vessels. There is no single better word to describe the
function of the heart other than “pump,” since its contraction develops
the pressure that ejects blood into the major vessels: the aorta and
pulmonary trunk. From these vessels, the blood is distributed to the
remainder of the body. Although the connotation of the term “pump”
suggests a mechanical device made of steel and plastic, the anatomical
structure is a living, sophisticated muscle. As you read this chapter,
try to keep these twin concepts in mind: pump and muscle.
{: #fs-id3033659}

Although the term “heart” is an English word, cardiac (heart-related)
terminology can be traced back to the Latin term, “kardia.” Cardiology
is the study of the heart, and cardiologists are the physicians who deal
primarily with the heart.
{: #fs-id2674748}




