---
title: Gonadal and Placental Hormones
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Identify the most important hormones produced by the testes and
  ovaries
* Name the hormones produced by the placenta and state their functions

</div>
This section briefly discusses the hormonal role of the gonads—the male
testes and female ovaries—which produce the sex cells (sperm and ova)
and secrete the gonadal hormones. The roles of the gonadotropins
released from the anterior pituitary (FSH and LH) were discussed
earlier.
{: #fs-id1217142}

The primary hormone produced by the male testes is <span
data-type="term">testosterone</span>, a steroid hormone important in the
development of the male reproductive system, the maturation of sperm
cells, and the development of male secondary sex characteristics such as
a deepened voice, body hair, and increased muscle mass. Interestingly,
testosterone is also produced in the female ovaries, but at a much
reduced level. In addition, the testes produce the peptide hormone <span
data-type="term">inhibin</span>, which inhibits the secretion of FSH
from the anterior pituitary gland. FSH stimulates spermatogenesis.
{: #fs-id1423637}

The primary hormones produced by the ovaries are <span
data-type="term">estrogens</span>, which include estradiol, estriol, and
estrone. Estrogens play an important role in a larger number of
physiological processes, including the development of the female
reproductive system, regulation of the menstrual cycle, the development
of female secondary sex characteristics such as increased adipose tissue
and the development of breast tissue, and the maintenance of pregnancy.
Another significant ovarian hormone is <span
data-type="term">progesterone</span>, which contributes to regulation of
the menstrual cycle and is important in preparing the body for pregnancy
as well as maintaining pregnancy. In addition, the granulosa cells of
the ovarian follicles produce inhibin, which—as in males—inhibits the
secretion of FSH.During the initial stages of pregnancy, an organ called
the placenta develops within the uterus. The placenta supplies oxygen
and nutrients to the fetus, excretes waste products, and produces and
secretes estrogens and progesterone. The placenta produces human
chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) as well. The hCG hormone promotes
progesterone synthesis and reduces the mother’s immune function to
protect the fetus from immune rejection. It also secretes human
placental lactogen (hPL), which plays a role in preparing the breasts
for lactation, and relaxin, which is thought to help soften and widen
the pubic symphysis in preparation for childbirth. The hormones
controlling reproduction are summarized in [\[link\]](#tbl-ch18_06){:
.autogenerated-content}.
{: #fs-id1431797}

<table id="tbl-ch18_06" summary=""><thead> <tr> <th colspan="4">Reproductive Hormones</th> </tr> <tr> <th>Gonad</th> <th>Associated hormones</th> <th>Chemical class</th> <th>Effect</th> </tr> </thead><tbody> <tr> <td>Testes</td> <td>Testosterone</td> <td>Steroid</td> <td>Stimulates development of male secondary sex characteristics and sperm production</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Testes</td> <td>Inhibin</td> <td>Protein</td> <td>Inhibits FSH release from pituitary</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Ovaries</td> <td>Estrogens and progesterone</td> <td>Steroid</td> <td>Stimulate development of female secondary sex characteristics and prepare the body for childbirth</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Placenta</td> <td>Human chorionic gonadotropin</td> <td>Protein</td> <td>Promotes progesterone synthesis during pregnancy and inhibits immune response against fetus</td> </tr> </tbody></table>
<div data-type="note" id="fs-id1417929" class="anatomy everyday" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Everyday Connections
</div>
<span data-type="title">Anabolic Steroids</span>The endocrine system can
be exploited for illegal or unethical purposes. A prominent example of
this is the use of steroid drugs by professional athletes.
{: #fs-id1415864}

Commonly used for performance enhancement, anabolic steroids are
synthetic versions of the male sex hormone, testosterone. By boosting
natural levels of this hormone, athletes experience increased muscle
mass. Synthetic versions of human growth hormone are also used to build
muscle mass.
{: #eip-292}

The use of performance-enhancing drugs is banned by all major collegiate
and professional sports organizations in the United States because they
impart an unfair advantage to athletes who take them. In addition, the
drugs can cause significant and dangerous side effects. For example,
anabolic steroid use can increase cholesterol levels, raise blood
pressure, and damage the liver. Altered testosterone levels (both too
low or too high) have been implicated in causing structural damage to
the heart, and increasing the risk for cardiac arrhythmias, heart
attacks, congestive heart failure, and sudden death. Paradoxically,
steroids can have a feminizing effect in males, including shriveled
testicles and enlarged breast tissue. In females, their use can cause
masculinizing effects such as an enlarged clitoris and growth of facial
hair. In both sexes, their use can promote increased aggression
(commonly known as “roid-rage”), depression, sleep disturbances, severe
acne, and infertility.
{: #eip-213}

</div>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1417877" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

The male and female reproductive system is regulated by
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) produced
by the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland in response to
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) from the hypothalamus. In males,
FSH stimulates sperm maturation, which is inhibited by the hormone
inhibin. The steroid hormone testosterone, a type of androgen, is
released in response to LH and is responsible for the maturation and
maintenance of the male reproductive system, as well as the development
of male secondary sex characteristics. In females, FSH promotes egg
maturation and LH signals the secretion of the female sex hormones, the
estrogens and progesterone. Both of these hormones are important in the
development and maintenance of the female reproductive system, as well
as maintaining pregnancy. The placenta develops during early pregnancy,
and secretes several hormones important for maintaining the pregnancy.
{: #fs-id1410292}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1416120" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1399907">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1433120" markdown="1">
The gonads produce what class of hormones?
{: #fs-id1422999}

1.  amine hormones
2.  peptide hormones
3.  steroid hormones
4.  catecholamines
{: #fs-id1432965 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1368652" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id1279317}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1394735">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1480198" markdown="1">
The production of FSH by the anterior pituitary is reduced by which
hormone?
{: #fs-id1394019}

1.  estrogens
2.  progesterone
3.  relaxin
4.  inhibin
{: #fs-id1428123 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1254500" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id1246484}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1382723">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1473842" markdown="1">
The function of the placental hormone human placental lactogen (hPL) is
to ________.
{: #fs-id1227778}

1.  prepare the breasts for lactation
2.  nourish the placenta
3.  regulate the menstrual cycle
4.  all of the above
{: #fs-id1375802 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1260991" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id1291708}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1349635" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1232448">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1322691" markdown="1">
Compare and contrast the role of estrogens and progesterone.
{: #fs-id1434406}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1399923" data-label="" markdown="1">
Both estrogens and progesterone are steroid hormones produced by the
ovaries that help regulate the menstrual cycle. Estrogens play an
important role in the development of the female reproductive tract and
secondary sex characteristics. They also help maintain pregnancy.
Progesterone prepares the body for pregnancy and helps maintain
pregnancy.
{: #fs-id1236648}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1339977">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1283750" markdown="1">
Describe the role of placental secretion of relaxin in preparation for
childbirth.
{: #fs-id841887}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1260896" data-label="" markdown="1">
Relaxin produced by the placenta is thought to soften and widen the
pubic symphysis. This increases the size of the pelvic outlet, the birth
canal through which the fetus passes during vaginal childbirth.
{: #fs-id1256534}

</div>
</div>
</section>



