---
title: Development and Aging of the Endocrine System
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Describe the embryonic origins of the endocrine system
* Discuss the effects of aging on the endocrine system

</div>
The endocrine system arises from all three embryonic germ layers. The
endocrine glands that produce the steroid hormones, such as the gonads
and adrenal cortex, arise from the mesoderm. In contrast, endocrine
glands that arise from the endoderm and ectoderm produce the amine,
peptide, and protein hormones. The pituitary gland arises from two
distinct areas of the ectoderm: the anterior pituitary gland arises from
the oral ectoderm, whereas the posterior pituitary gland arises from the
neural ectoderm at the base of the hypothalamus. The pineal gland also
arises from the ectoderm. The two structures of the adrenal glands arise
from two different germ layers: the adrenal cortex from the mesoderm and
the adrenal medulla from ectoderm neural cells. The endoderm gives rise
to the thyroid and parathyroid glands, as well as the pancreas and the
thymus.
{: #fs-id1231476}

As the body ages, changes occur that affect the endocrine system,
sometimes altering the production, secretion, and catabolism of
hormones. For example, the structure of the anterior pituitary gland
changes as vascularization decreases and the connective tissue content
increases with increasing age. This restructuring affects the gland’s
hormone production. For example, the amount of human growth hormone that
is produced declines with age, resulting in the reduced muscle mass
commonly observed in the elderly.
{: #eip-324}

The adrenal glands also undergo changes as the body ages; as fibrous
tissue increases, the production of cortisol and aldosterone decreases.
Interestingly, the production and secretion of epinephrine and
norepinephrine remain normal throughout the aging process.
{: #fs-id1475474}

A well-known example of the aging process affecting an endocrine gland
is menopause and the decline of ovarian function. With increasing age,
the ovaries decrease in both size and weight and become progressively
less sensitive to gonadotropins. This gradually causes a decrease in
estrogen and progesterone levels, leading to menopause and the inability
to reproduce. Low levels of estrogens and progesterone are also
associated with some disease states, such as osteoporosis,
atherosclerosis, and hyperlipidemia, or abnormal blood lipid levels.
{: #fs-id1962840}

Testosterone levels also decline with age, a condition called andropause
(or viropause); however, this decline is much less dramatic than the
decline of estrogens in women, and much more gradual, rarely affecting
sperm production until very old age. Although this means that males
maintain their ability to father children for decades longer than
females, the quantity, quality, and motility of their sperm is often
reduced.
{: #fs-id1959752}

As the body ages, the thyroid gland produces less of the thyroid
hormones, causing a gradual decrease in the basal metabolic rate. The
lower metabolic rate reduces the production of body heat and increases
levels of body fat. Parathyroid hormones, on the other hand, increase
with age. This may be because of reduced dietary calcium levels, causing
a compensatory increase in parathyroid hormone. However, increased
parathyroid hormone levels combined with decreased levels of calcitonin
(and estrogens in women) can lead to osteoporosis as PTH stimulates
demineralization of bones to increase blood calcium levels. Notice that
osteoporosis is common in both elderly males and females.
{: #fs-id1890419}

Increasing age also affects glucose metabolism, as blood glucose levels
spike more rapidly and take longer to return to normal in the elderly.
In addition, increasing glucose intolerance may occur because of a
gradual decline in cellular insulin sensitivity. Almost 27 percent of
Americans aged 65 and older have diabetes.
{: #fs-id1752975}

<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1890932" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

The endocrine system originates from all three germ layers of the
embryo, including the endoderm, ectoderm, and mesoderm. In general,
different hormone classes arise from distinct germ layers. Aging affects
the endocrine glands, potentially affecting hormone production and
secretion, and can cause disease. The production of hormones, such as
human growth hormone, cortisol, aldosterone, sex hormones, and the
thyroid hormones, decreases with age.
{: #fs-id1891029}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1260897" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1954035">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1548578" markdown="1">
The anterior pituitary gland develops from which embryonic germ layer?
{: #fs-id1381994}

1.  oral ectoderm
2.  neural ectoderm
3.  mesoderm
4.  endoderm
{: #fs-id2033733 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1255413" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id1477753}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1382612">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1340332" markdown="1">
In the elderly, decreased thyroid function causes ________.
{: #fs-id1380463}

1.  increased tolerance for cold
2.  decreased basal metabolic rate
3.  decreased body fat
4.  osteoporosis
{: #fs-id1605544 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1225507" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id1841153}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1984222" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1297233">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1216026" markdown="1">
Distinguish between the effects of menopause and andropause on
fertility.
{: #fs-id2036880}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1698701" data-label="" markdown="1">
Menopause occurs as the result of a progressive decline in the function
of the ovaries, resulting in low estrogen and progesterone levels.
Ovulation ceases, and postmenopausal woman can no longer conceive a
child. In contrast, andropause is a much more gradual and subtle decline
in testosterone levels and functioning. A man typically maintains
fertility until very old age, although the quantity, quality, and
motility of the sperm he produces may be reduced.
{: #fs-id1959370}

</div>
</div>
</section>



