---
title: Blood Flow, Blood Pressure, and Resistance
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Distinguish between systolic pressure, diastolic pressure, pulse
  pressure, and mean arterial pressure
* Describe the clinical measurement of pulse and blood pressure
* Identify and discuss five variables affecting arterial blood flow and
  blood pressure
* Discuss several factors affecting blood flow in the venous system

</div>
<span data-type="term">Blood flow</span> refers to the movement of blood
through a vessel, tissue, or organ, and is usually expressed in terms of
volume of blood per unit of time. It is initiated by the contraction of
the ventricles of the heart. Ventricular contraction ejects blood into
the major arteries, resulting in flow from regions of higher pressure to
regions of lower pressure, as blood encounters smaller arteries and
arterioles, then capillaries, then the venules and veins of the venous
system. This section discusses a number of critical variables that
contribute to blood flow throughout the body. It also discusses the
factors that impede or slow blood flow, a phenomenon known as <span
data-type="term">resistance</span>.
{: #fs-id1904275}

As noted earlier, hydrostatic pressure is the force exerted by a fluid
due to gravitational pull, usually against the wall of the container in
which it is located. One form of hydrostatic pressure is <span
data-type="term">blood pressure</span>, the force exerted by blood upon
the walls of the blood vessels or the chambers of the heart. Blood
pressure may be measured in capillaries and veins, as well as the
vessels of the pulmonary circulation; however, the term blood pressure
without any specific descriptors typically refers to systemic arterial
blood pressure—that is, the pressure of blood flowing in the arteries of
the systemic circulation. In clinical practice, this pressure is
measured in mm Hg and is usually obtained using the brachial artery of
the arm.
{: #fs-id1551227}

<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2058349" markdown="1">
# Components of Arterial Blood Pressure
{: data-type="title"}

Arterial blood pressure in the larger vessels consists of several
distinct components ([\[link\]](#fig-ch21_02_01){:
.autogenerated-content}): systolic and diastolic pressures, pulse
pressure, and mean arterial pressure.
{: #fs-id2115108}

<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1802671" markdown="1">
## Systolic and Diastolic Pressures
{: data-type="title"}

When systemic arterial blood pressure is measured, it is recorded as a
ratio of two numbers (e.g., 120/80 is a normal adult blood pressure),
expressed as systolic pressure over diastolic pressure. The <span
data-type="term">systolic pressure</span> is the higher value (typically
around 120 mm Hg) and reflects the arterial pressure resulting from the
ejection of blood during ventricular contraction, or systole. The <span
data-type="term">diastolic pressure</span> is the lower value (usually
about 80 mm Hg) and represents the arterial pressure of blood during
ventricular relaxation, or diastole.
{: #fs-id1324506}

<figure id="fig-ch21_02_01">
<div data-type="title">
Systemic Blood Pressure
</div>
<figcaption>
The graph shows the components of blood pressure throughout the blood
vessels, including systolic, diastolic, mean arterial, and pulse
pressures.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1311049" data-alt="This graph shows the
value of pulse pressure in different types of blood vessels."> ![This
graph shows the value of pulse pressure in different types of blood
vessels.](../resources/2109_Systemic_Blood_Pressure.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="500"} </span>
</figure>
</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1720474" markdown="1">
## Pulse Pressure
{: data-type="title"}

As shown in [\[link\]](#fig-ch21_02_01){: .autogenerated-content}, the
difference between the systolic pressure and the diastolic pressure is
the <span data-type="term">pulse pressure</span>. For example, an
individual with a systolic pressure of 120 mm Hg and a diastolic
pressure of 80 mm Hg would have a pulse pressure of 40 mmHg.
{: #fs-id2935943}

Generally, a pulse pressure should be at least 25 percent of the
systolic pressure. A pulse pressure below this level is described as low
or narrow. This may occur, for example, in patients with a low stroke
volume, which may be seen in congestive heart failure, stenosis of the
aortic valve, or significant blood loss following trauma. In contrast, a
high or wide pulse pressure is common in healthy people following
strenuous exercise, when their resting pulse pressure of 30–40 mm Hg may
increase temporarily to 100 mm Hg as stroke volume increases. A
persistently high pulse pressure at or above 100 mm Hg may indicate
excessive resistance in the arteries and can be caused by a variety of
disorders. Chronic high resting pulse pressures can degrade the heart,
brain, and kidneys, and warrant medical treatment.
{: #fs-id2163550}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1745200" markdown="1">
## Mean Arterial Pressure
{: data-type="title"}

<span data-type="term">Mean arterial pressure (MAP)</span> represents
the “average” pressure of blood in the arteries, that is, the average
force driving blood into vessels that serve the tissues. Mean is a
statistical concept and is calculated by taking the sum of the values
divided by the number of values. Although complicated to measure
directly and complicated to calculate, MAP can be approximated by adding
the diastolic pressure to one-third of the pulse pressure or systolic
pressure minus the diastolic pressure:
{: #fs-id2177683}

<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="block">
<semantics> <mrow> <mtext>MAP = diastolic BP + </mtext><mfrac> <mrow>
<mtext>(systolic-diastolic BP)</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>3</mtext> </mfrac>
</mrow> <annotation
encoding="MathType-MTEF">MathType@MTEF@5@5@+=feaagyart1ev2aaatCvAUfeBSjuyZL2yd9gzLbvyNv2CaerbuLwBLnhiov2DGi1BTfMBaeXatLxBI9gBaerbd9wDYLwzYbItLDharqqtubsr4rNCHbGeaGqiVu0Je9sqqrpepC0xbbL8F4rqqrFfpeea0xe9Lq=Jc9vqaqpepm0xbba9pwe9Q8fs0=yqaqpepae9pg0FirpepeKkFr0xfr=xfr=xb9adbaqaaeGaciGaaiaabeqaamaabaabaaGcbaGaaeytaiaabgeacaqGqbGaaeiiaiaab2dacaqGGaGaaeizaiaabMgacaqGHbGaae4CaiaabshacaqGVbGaaeiBaiaabMgacaqGJbGaaeiiaiaabkeacaqGqbGaaeiiaiaabUcacaqGGaWaaSaaaeaacaqGOaGaae4CaiaabMhacaqGZbGaaeiDaiaab+gacaqGSbGaaeyAaiaabogacaqGTaGaaeizaiaabMgacaqGHbGaae4CaiaabshacaqGVbGaaeiBaiaabMgacaqGJbGaaeiiaiaabkeacaqGqbGaaeykaaqaaiaabodaaaaaaa@5BD7@</annotation>
</semantics> </math>
{: #fs-id2169609}

In [\[link\]](#fig-ch21_02_01){: .autogenerated-content}, this value is
approximately 80 + (120 − 80) / 3, or 93.33. Normally, the MAP falls
within the range of 70–110 mm Hg. If the value falls below 60 mm Hg for
an extended time, blood pressure will not be high enough to ensure
circulation to and through the tissues, which results in <span
data-type="term">ischemia</span>, or insufficient blood flow. A
condition called <span data-type="term">hypoxia</span>, inadequate
oxygenation of tissues, commonly accompanies ischemia. The term
hypoxemia refers to low levels of oxygen in systemic arterial blood.
Neurons are especially sensitive to hypoxia and may die or be damaged if
blood flow and oxygen supplies are not quickly restored.
{: #fs-id1478018}

</section>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1337968" markdown="1">
# Pulse
{: data-type="title"}

After blood is ejected from the heart, elastic fibers in the arteries
help maintain a high-pressure gradient as they expand to accommodate the
blood, then recoil. This expansion and recoiling effect, known as the
<span data-type="term">pulse</span>, can be palpated manually or
measured electronically. Although the effect diminishes over distance
from the heart, elements of the systolic and diastolic components of the
pulse are still evident down to the level of the arterioles.
{: #fs-id1122975}

Because pulse indicates heart rate, it is measured clinically to provide
clues to a patient’s state of health. It is recorded as beats per
minute. Both the rate and the strength of the pulse are important
clinically. A high or irregular pulse rate can be caused by physical
activity or other temporary factors, but it may also indicate a heart
condition. The pulse strength indicates the strength of ventricular
contraction and cardiac output. If the pulse is strong, then systolic
pressure is high. If it is weak, systolic pressure has fallen, and
medical intervention may be warranted.
{: #fs-id2365430}

Pulse can be palpated manually by placing the tips of the fingers across
an artery that runs close to the body surface and pressing lightly.
While this procedure is normally performed using the radial artery in
the wrist or the common carotid artery in the neck, any superficial
artery that can be palpated may be used ([\[link\]](#fig-ch21_02_02){:
.autogenerated-content}). Common sites to find a pulse include temporal
and facial arteries in the head, brachial arteries in the upper arm,
femoral arteries in the thigh, popliteal arteries behind the knees,
posterior tibial arteries near the medial tarsal regions, and dorsalis
pedis arteries in the feet. A variety of commercial electronic devices
are also available to measure pulse.
{: #fs-id2505708}

<figure id="fig-ch21_02_02">
<div data-type="title">
Pulse Sites
</div>
<figcaption>
The pulse is most readily measured at the radial artery, but can be
measured at any of the pulse points shown.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1520802" data-alt="This image shows the
pulse points in a woman&#x2019;s body."> ![This image shows the pulse
points in a woman&#x2019;s body.](../resources/2110_Pulse_Sites.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="320"} </span>
</figure>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2067725" markdown="1">
# Measurement of Blood Pressure
{: data-type="title"}

Blood pressure is one of the critical parameters measured on virtually
every patient in every healthcare setting. The technique used today was
developed more than 100 years ago by a pioneering Russian physician, Dr.
Nikolai Korotkoff. Turbulent blood flow through the vessels can be heard
as a soft ticking while measuring blood pressure; these sounds are known
as <span data-type="term">Korotkoff sounds</span>. The technique of
measuring blood pressure requires the use of a <span
data-type="term">sphygmomanometer</span> (a blood pressure cuff attached
to a measuring device) and a stethoscope. The technique is as follows:
{: #fs-id2105547}

* The clinician wraps an inflatable cuff tightly around the patient’s
  arm at about the level of the heart.
* The clinician squeezes a rubber pump to inject air into the cuff,
  raising pressure around the artery and temporarily cutting off blood
  flow into the patient’s arm.
* The clinician places the stethoscope on the patient’s antecubital
  region and, while gradually allowing air within the cuff to escape,
  listens for the Korotkoff sounds.
{: #fs-id2534201}

Although there are five recognized Korotkoff sounds, only two are
normally recorded. Initially, no sounds are heard since there is no
blood flow through the vessels, but as air pressure drops, the cuff
relaxes, and blood flow returns to the arm. As shown in
[\[link\]](#fig-ch21_02_03){: .autogenerated-content}, the first sound
heard through the stethoscope—the first Korotkoff sound—indicates
systolic pressure. As more air is released from the cuff, blood is able
to flow freely through the brachial artery and all sounds disappear. The
point at which the last sound is heard is recorded as the patient’s
diastolic pressure.
{: #fs-id2006868}

<figure id="fig-ch21_02_03">
<div data-type="title">
Blood Pressure Measurement
</div>
<figcaption>
When pressure in a sphygmomanometer cuff is released, a clinician can
hear the Korotkoff sounds. In this graph, a blood pressure tracing is
aligned to a measurement of systolic and diastolic pressures.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1430121" data-alt="This image shows
blood pressure as a function of time."> ![This image shows blood
pressure as a function of
time.](../resources/2111_Blood_Pressure_Graph.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="450"} </span>
</figure>
The majority of hospitals and clinics have automated equipment for
measuring blood pressure that work on the same principles. An even more
recent innovation is a small instrument that wraps around a patient’s
wrist. The patient then holds the wrist over the heart while the device
measures blood flow and records pressure.
{: #fs-id2162534}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2467594" markdown="1">
# Variables Affecting Blood Flow and Blood Pressure
{: data-type="title"}

Five variables influence blood flow and blood pressure:
{: #fs-id2041804}

* Cardiac output
* Compliance
* Volume of the blood
* Viscosity of the blood
* Blood vessel length and diameter
{: #fs-id1297058}

Recall that blood moves from higher pressure to lower pressure. It is
pumped from the heart into the arteries at high pressure. If you
increase pressure in the arteries (afterload), and cardiac function does
not compensate, blood flow will actually decrease. In the venous system,
the opposite relationship is true. Increased pressure in the veins does
not decrease flow as it does in arteries, but actually increases flow.
Since pressure in the veins is normally relatively low, for blood to
flow back into the heart, the pressure in the atria during atrial
diastole must be even lower. It normally approaches zero, except when
the atria contract (see [\[link\]](#fig-ch21_02_01){:
.autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id1739754}

<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id2047462" markdown="1">
## Cardiac Output
{: data-type="title"}

Cardiac output is the measurement of blood flow from the heart through
the ventricles, and is usually measured in liters per minute. Any factor
that causes cardiac output to increase, by elevating heart rate or
stroke volume or both, will elevate blood pressure and promote blood
flow. These factors include sympathetic stimulation, the catecholamines
epinephrine and norepinephrine, thyroid hormones, and increased calcium
ion levels. Conversely, any factor that decreases cardiac output, by
decreasing heart rate or stroke volume or both, will decrease arterial
pressure and blood flow. These factors include parasympathetic
stimulation, elevated or decreased potassium ion levels, decreased
calcium levels, anoxia, and acidosis.
{: #fs-id2182821}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id3855987" markdown="1">
## Compliance
{: data-type="title"}

<span data-type="term">Compliance</span> is the ability of any
compartment to expand to accommodate increased content. A metal pipe,
for example, is not compliant, whereas a balloon is. The greater the
compliance of an artery, the more effectively it is able to expand to
accommodate surges in blood flow without increased resistance or blood
pressure. Veins are more compliant than arteries and can expand to hold
more blood. When vascular disease causes stiffening of arteries,
compliance is reduced and resistance to blood flow is increased. The
result is more turbulence, higher pressure within the vessel, and
reduced blood flow. This increases the work of the heart.
{: #fs-id2467592}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1364866" markdown="1">
## A Mathematical Approach to Factors Affecting Blood Flow
{: data-type="title"}

Jean Louis Marie Poiseuille was a French physician and physiologist who
devised a mathematical equation describing blood flow and its
relationship to known parameters. The same equation also applies to
engineering studies of the flow of fluids. Although understanding the
math behind the relationships among the factors affecting blood flow is
not necessary to understand blood flow, it can help solidify an
understanding of their relationships. Please note that even if the
equation looks intimidating, breaking it down into its components and
following the relationships will make these relationships clearer, even
if you are weak in math. Focus on the three critical variables: radius
(r), vessel length (λ), and viscosity (η).
{: #fs-id1733439}

Poiseuille’s equation:
{: #fs-id2675192}

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-824">
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="block"> <semantics> <mrow> <mtext>Blood flow = </mtext><mfrac> <mrow> <msup> <mrow> <mtext>π ΔP r</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>4</mtext> </msup> </mrow> <mrow> <mtext>8ηλ</mtext> </mrow> </mfrac> </mrow> <annotation encoding="MathType-MTEF">MathType@MTEF@5@5@+=feaagyart1ev2aaatCvAUfeBSjuyZL2yd9gzLbvyNv2CaerbuLwBLnhiov2DGi1BTfMBaeXatLxBI9gBaerbd9wDYLwzYbItLDharqqtubsr4rNCHbGeaGqiVu0Je9sqqrpepC0xbbL8F4rqqrFfpeea0xe9Lq=Jc9vqaqpepm0xbba9pwe9Q8fs0=yqaqpepae9pg0FirpepeKkFr0xfr=xfr=xb9adbaqaaeGaciGaaiaabeqaamaabaabaaGcbaGaaeOqaiaabYgacaqGVbGaae4BaiaabsgacaqGGaGaaeOzaiaabYgacaqGVbGaae4DaiaabccacaqG9aGaaeiiamaalaaabaGaaeiWdiaabccacaqGuoGaaeiuaiaabccacaqGYbWaaWbaaSqabeaacaqG0aaaaaGcbaGaaeioaiaabE7acaqG7oaaaaaa@4A84@</annotation> </semantics> </math>
</div>
* π is the Greek letter pi, used to represent the mathematical constant
  that is the ratio of a circle’s circumference to its diameter. It may
  commonly be represented as 3.14, although the actual number extends to
  infinity.
* ΔP represents the difference in pressure.
* r<sup>4 </sup>is the radius (one-half of the diameter) of the vessel
  to the fourth power.
* η is the Greek letter eta and represents the viscosity of the blood.
* λ is the Greek letter lambda and represents the length of a blood
  vessel.
{: #eip-517 data-bullet-style="none"}

One of several things this equation allows us to do is calculate the
resistance in the vascular system. Normally this value is extremely
difficult to measure, but it can be calculated from this known
relationship:
{: #fs-id2339510}

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-456">
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="block"> <semantics> <mrow> <mtext>Blood flow = </mtext><mfrac> <mrow> <mtext>ΔP</mtext> </mrow> <mrow> <mtext>Resistance</mtext> </mrow> </mfrac> </mrow> <annotation encoding="MathType-MTEF">MathType@MTEF@5@5@+=feaagyart1ev2aaatCvAUfeBSjuyZL2yd9gzLbvyNv2CaerbuLwBLnhiov2DGi1BTfMBaeXatLxBI9gBaerbd9wDYLwzYbItLDharqqtubsr4rNCHbGeaGqiVu0Je9sqqrpepC0xbbL8F4rqqrFfpeea0xe9Lq=Jc9vqaqpepm0xbba9pwe9Q8fs0=yqaqpepae9pg0FirpepeKkFr0xfr=xfr=xb9adbaqaaeGaciGaaiaabeqaamaabaabaaGcbaGaaeOqaiaabYgacaqGVbGaae4BaiaabsgacaqGGaGaaeOzaiaabYgacaqGVbGaae4DaiaabccacaqG9aGaaeiiamaalaaabaGaaeiLdiaabcfaaeaacaqGsbGaaeyzaiaabohacaqGPbGaae4CaiaabshacaqGHbGaaeOBaiaabogacaqGLbaaaaaa@4C0B@</annotation> </semantics> </math>
</div>
If we rearrange this slightly,
{: #fs-id2395114}

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-529">
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="block"> <semantics> <mrow> <mtext>Resistance = </mtext><mfrac> <mrow> <mtext>ΔP</mtext> </mrow> <mrow> <mtext>Blood flow</mtext> </mrow> </mfrac> </mrow> <annotation encoding="MathType-MTEF">MathType@MTEF@5@5@+=feaagyart1ev2aaatCvAUfeBSjuyZL2yd9gzLbvyNv2CaerbuLwBLnhiov2DGi1BTfMBaeXatLxBI9gBaerbd9wDYLwzYbItLDharqqtubsr4rNCHbGeaGqiVu0Je9sqqrpepC0xbbL8F4rqqrFfpeea0xe9Lq=Jc9vqaqpepm0xbba9pwe9Q8fs0=yqaqpepae9pg0FirpepeKkFr0xfr=xfr=xb9adbaqaaeGaciGaaiaabeqaamaabaabaaGcbaGaaeOuaiaabwgacaqGZbGaaeyAaiaabohacaqG0bGaaeyyaiaab6gacaqGJbGaaeyzaiaabccacaqG9aGaaeiiamaalaaabaGaaeiLdiaabcfaaeaacaqGcbGaaeiBaiaab+gacaqGVbGaaeizaiaabccacaqGMbGaaeiBaiaab+gacaqG3baaaaaa@4C0B@</annotation> </semantics> </math>
</div>
Then by substituting Pouseille’s equation for blood flow:
{: #fs-id1365136}

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-848">
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display="block"> <semantics> <mrow> <mtext>Resistance =</mtext><mfrac> <mrow> <mtext>8ηλ</mtext> </mrow> <mrow> <msup> <mrow> <mtext>πr</mtext> </mrow> <mtext>4</mtext> </msup> </mrow> </mfrac> </mrow> <annotation encoding="MathType-MTEF">MathType@MTEF@5@5@+=feaagyart1ev2aaatCvAUfeBSjuyZL2yd9gzLbvyNv2CaerbuLwBLnhiov2DGi1BTfMBaeXatLxBI9gBaerbd9wDYLwzYbItLDharqqtubsr4rNCHbGeaGqiVu0Je9sqqrpepC0xbbL8F4rqqrFfpeea0xe9Lq=Jc9vqaqpepm0xbba9pwe9Q8fs0=yqaqpepae9pg0FirpepeKkFr0xfr=xfr=xb9adbaqaaeGaciGaaiaabeqaamaabaabaaGcbaGaaeOuaiaabwgacaqGZbGaaeyAaiaabohacaqG0bGaaeyyaiaab6gacaqGJbGaaeyzaiaabccacaqG9aWaaSaaaeaacaqG4aGaae4TdiaabU7aaeaacaqGapGaaeOCamaaCaaaleqabaGaaeinaaaaaaaaaa@46ED@</annotation> </semantics> </math>
</div>
By examining this equation, you can see that there are only three
variables: viscosity, vessel length, and radius, since 8 and π are both
constants. The important thing to remember is this: Two of these
variables, viscosity and vessel length, will change slowly in the body.
Only one of these factors, the radius, can be changed rapidly by
vasoconstriction and vasodilation, thus dramatically impacting
resistance and flow. Further, small changes in the radius will greatly
affect flow, since it is raised to the fourth power in the equation.
{: #fs-id1390569}

We have briefly considered how cardiac output and blood volume impact
blood flow and pressure; the next step is to see how the other variables
(contraction, vessel length, and viscosity) articulate with Pouseille’s
equation and what they can teach us about the impact on blood flow.
{: #fs-id1986982}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id2457058" markdown="1">
## Blood Volume
{: data-type="title"}

The relationship between blood volume, blood pressure, and blood flow is
intuitively obvious. Water may merely trickle along a creek bed in a dry
season, but rush quickly and under great pressure after a heavy rain.
Similarly, as blood volume decreases, pressure and flow decrease. As
blood volume increases, pressure and flow increase.
{: #fs-id1591226}

Under normal circumstances, blood volume varies little. Low blood
volume, called <span data-type="term">hypovolemia</span>, may be caused
by bleeding, dehydration, vomiting, severe burns, or some medications
used to treat hypertension. It is important to recognize that other
regulatory mechanisms in the body are so effective at maintaining blood
pressure that an individual may be asymptomatic until 10–20 percent of
the blood volume has been lost. Treatment typically includes intravenous
fluid replacement.
{: #fs-id1208881}

<span data-type="term">Hypervolemia</span>, excessive fluid volume, may
be caused by retention of water and sodium, as seen in patients with
heart failure, liver cirrhosis, some forms of kidney disease,
hyperaldosteronism, and some glucocorticoid steroid treatments.
Restoring homeostasis in these patients depends upon reversing the
condition that triggered the hypervolemia.
{: #fs-id1277470}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id3008108" markdown="1">
## Blood Viscosity
{: data-type="title"}

Viscosity is the thickness of fluids that affects their ability to flow.
Clean water, for example, is less viscous than mud. The viscosity of
blood is directly proportional to resistance and inversely proportional
to flow; therefore, any condition that causes viscosity to increase will
also increase resistance and decrease flow. For example, imagine sipping
milk, then a milkshake, through the same size straw. You experience more
resistance and therefore less flow from the milkshake. Conversely, any
condition that causes viscosity to decrease (such as when the milkshake
melts) will decrease resistance and increase flow.
{: #fs-id3089917}

Normally the viscosity of blood does not change over short periods of
time. The two primary determinants of blood viscosity are the formed
elements and plasma proteins. Since the vast majority of formed elements
are erythrocytes, any condition affecting erythropoiesis, such as
polycythemia or anemia, can alter viscosity. Since most plasma proteins
are produced by the liver, any condition affecting liver function can
also change the viscosity slightly and therefore decrease blood flow.
Liver abnormalities include hepatitis, cirrhosis, alcohol damage, and
drug toxicities. While leukocytes and platelets are normally a small
component of the formed elements, there are some rare conditions in
which severe overproduction can impact viscosity as well.
{: #fs-id2505034}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1452307" markdown="1">
## Vessel Length and Diameter
{: data-type="title"}

The length of a vessel is directly proportional to its resistance: the
longer the vessel, the greater the resistance and the lower the flow. As
with blood volume, this makes intuitive sense, since the increased
surface area of the vessel will impede the flow of blood. Likewise, if
the vessel is shortened, the resistance will decrease and flow will
increase.
{: #fs-id1518088}

The length of our blood vessels increases throughout childhood as we
grow, of course, but is unchanging in adults under normal physiological
circumstances. Further, the distribution of vessels is not the same in
all tissues. Adipose tissue does not have an extensive vascular supply.
One pound of adipose tissue contains approximately 200 miles of vessels,
whereas skeletal muscle contains more than twice that. Overall, vessels
decrease in length only during loss of mass or amputation. An individual
weighing 150 pounds has approximately 60,000 miles of vessels in the
body. Gaining about 10 pounds adds from 2000 to 4000 miles of vessels,
depending upon the nature of the gained tissue. One of the great
benefits of weight reduction is the reduced stress to the heart, which
does not have to overcome the resistance of as many miles of vessels.
{: #fs-id1816877}

In contrast to length, the diameter of blood vessels changes throughout
the body, according to the type of vessel, as we discussed earlier. The
diameter of any given vessel may also change frequently throughout the
day in response to neural and chemical signals that trigger vasodilation
and vasoconstriction. The <span data-type="term">vascular tone</span> of
the vessel is the contractile state of the smooth muscle and the primary
determinant of diameter, and thus of resistance and flow. The effect of
vessel diameter on resistance is inverse: Given the same volume of
blood, an increased diameter means there is less blood contacting the
vessel wall, thus lower friction and lower resistance, subsequently
increasing flow. A decreased diameter means more of the blood contacts
the vessel wall, and resistance increases, subsequently decreasing flow.
{: #fs-id2047052}

The influence of lumen diameter on resistance is dramatic: A slight
increase or decrease in diameter causes a huge decrease or increase in
resistance. This is because resistance is inversely proportional to the
radius of the blood vessel (one-half of the vessel’s diameter) raised to
the fourth power (R = 1/r<sup>4</sup>). This means, for example, that if
an artery or arteriole constricts to one-half of its original radius,
the resistance to flow will increase 16 times. And if an artery or
arteriole dilates to twice its initial radius, then resistance in the
vessel will decrease to 1/16 of its original value and flow will
increase 16 times.
{: #fs-id2008487}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1492982" markdown="1">
## The Roles of Vessel Diameter and Total Area in Blood Flow and Blood Pressure
{: data-type="title"}

Recall that we classified arterioles as resistance vessels, because
given their small lumen, they dramatically slow the flow of blood from
arteries. In fact, arterioles are the site of greatest resistance in the
entire vascular network. This may seem surprising, given that
capillaries have a smaller size. How can this phenomenon be explained?
{: #fs-id2340245}

[\[link\]](#fig-ch21_02_04){: .autogenerated-content} compares vessel
diameter, total cross-sectional area, average blood pressure, and blood
velocity through the systemic vessels. Notice in parts (a) and (b) that
the total cross-sectional area of the body’s capillary beds is far
greater than any other type of vessel. Although the diameter of an
individual capillary is significantly smaller than the diameter of an
arteriole, there are vastly more capillaries in the body than there are
other types of blood vessels. Part (c) shows that blood pressure drops
unevenly as blood travels from arteries to arterioles, capillaries,
venules, and veins, and encounters greater resistance. However, the site
of the most precipitous drop, and the site of greatest resistance, is
the arterioles. This explains why vasodilation and vasoconstriction of
arterioles play more significant roles in regulating blood pressure than
do the vasodilation and vasoconstriction of other vessels.
{: #fs-id3046531}

Part (d) shows that the velocity (speed) of blood flow decreases
dramatically as the blood moves from arteries to arterioles to
capillaries. This slow flow rate allows more time for exchange processes
to occur. As blood flows through the veins, the rate of velocity
increases, as blood is returned to the heart.
{: #fs-id1389684}

<figure id="fig-ch21_02_04">
<div data-type="title">
Relationships among Vessels in the Systemic Circuit
</div>
<figcaption>
The relationships among blood vessels that can be compared include (a)
vessel diameter, (b) total cross-sectional area, (c) average blood
pressure, and (d) velocity of blood flow.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1902272" data-alt="This figure shows
four graphs. The top left graph shows the vessel diameter for different
types of blood vessels. The top right panel shows cross-sectional area
for different blood vessels. The bottom left panel shows the average
blood pressure for different blood vessels, and the bottom right panel
shows the velocity of blood flow in different blood vessels."> ![This
figure shows four graphs. The top left graph shows the vessel diameter
for different types of blood vessels. The top right panel shows
cross-sectional area for different blood vessels. The bottom left panel
shows the average blood pressure for different blood vessels, and the
bottom right panel shows the velocity of blood flow in different blood
vessels.](../resources/2112_Vessel_Blood_Pressure_Relationships.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="520"} </span>
</figure>
<div data-type="note" id="fs-id1813175" class="anatomy disorders" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Disorders of the…
</div>
<span data-type="title">Cardiovascular System: Arteriosclerosis</span>
Compliance allows an artery to expand when blood is pumped through it
from the heart, and then to recoil after the surge has passed. This
helps promote blood flow. In arteriosclerosis, compliance is reduced,
and pressure and resistance within the vessel increase. This is a
leading cause of hypertension and coronary heart disease, as it causes
the heart to work harder to generate a pressure great enough to overcome
the resistance.
{: #fs-id2168783}

Arteriosclerosis begins with injury to the endothelium of an artery,
which may be caused by irritation from high blood glucose, infection,
tobacco use, excessive blood lipids, and other factors. Artery walls
that are constantly stressed by blood flowing at high pressure are also
more likely to be injured—which means that hypertension can promote
arteriosclerosis, as well as result from it.
{: #fs-id1599843}

Recall that tissue injury causes inflammation. As inflammation spreads
into the artery wall, it weakens and scars it, leaving it stiff
(sclerotic). As a result, compliance is reduced. Moreover, circulating
triglycerides and cholesterol can seep between the damaged lining cells
and become trapped within the artery wall, where they are frequently
joined by leukocytes, calcium, and cellular debris. Eventually, this
buildup, called plaque, can narrow arteries enough to impair blood flow.
The term for this condition, atherosclerosis (athero- = “porridge”)
describes the mealy deposits ([\[link\]](#fig-ch21_02_05){:
.autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id1319977}

<figure id="fig-ch21_02_05">
<div data-type="title">
Atherosclerosis
</div>
<figcaption>
(a) Atherosclerosis can result from plaques formed by the buildup of
fatty, calcified deposits in an artery. (b) Plaques can also take other
forms, as shown in this micrograph of a coronary artery that has a
buildup of connective tissue within the artery wall. LM × 40.
(Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical
School © 2012)
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2041165" data-alt="The left panel shows
the cross-section of a normal and a narrowed artery. The right panel
shows a micrograph of an artery with plaque in it."> ![The left panel
shows the cross-section of a normal and a narrowed artery. The right
panel shows a micrograph of an artery with plaque in
it.](../resources/2113ab_Atherosclerosis.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="520"} </span>
</figure>
Sometimes a plaque can rupture, causing microscopic tears in the artery
wall that allow blood to leak into the tissue on the other side. When
this happens, platelets rush to the site to clot the blood. This clot
can further obstruct the artery and—if it occurs in a coronary or
cerebral artery—cause a sudden heart attack or stroke. Alternatively,
plaque can break off and travel through the bloodstream as an embolus
until it blocks a more distant, smaller artery.
{: #fs-id1359187}

Even without total blockage, vessel narrowing leads to ischemia—reduced
blood flow—to the tissue region “downstream” of the narrowed vessel.
Ischemia in turn leads to hypoxia—decreased supply of oxygen to the
tissues. Hypoxia involving cardiac muscle or brain tissue can lead to
cell death and severe impairment of brain or heart function.
{: #fs-id1518807}

A major risk factor for both arteriosclerosis and atherosclerosis is
advanced age, as the conditions tend to progress over time.
Arteriosclerosis is normally defined as the more generalized loss of
compliance, “hardening of the arteries,” whereas atherosclerosis is a
more specific term for the build-up of plaque in the walls of the vessel
and is a specific type of arteriosclerosis. There is also a distinct
genetic component, and pre-existing hypertension and/or diabetes also
greatly increase the risk. However, obesity, poor nutrition, lack of
physical activity, and tobacco use all are major risk factors.
{: #fs-id2115266}

Treatment includes lifestyle changes, such as weight loss, smoking
cessation, regular exercise, and adoption of a diet low in sodium and
saturated fats. Medications to reduce cholesterol and blood pressure may
be prescribed. For blocked coronary arteries, surgery is warranted. In
angioplasty, a catheter is inserted into the vessel at the point of
narrowing, and a second catheter with a balloon-like tip is inflated to
widen the opening. To prevent subsequent collapse of the vessel, a small
mesh tube called a stent is often inserted. In an endarterectomy, plaque
is surgically removed from the walls of a vessel. This operation is
typically performed on the carotid arteries of the neck, which are a
prime source of oxygenated blood for the brain. In a coronary bypass
procedure, a non-vital superficial vessel from another part of the body
(often the great saphenous vein) or a synthetic vessel is inserted to
create a path around the blocked area of a coronary artery.
{: #fs-id2177348}

</div>
</section>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2459044" markdown="1">
# Venous System
{: data-type="title"}

The pumping action of the heart propels the blood into the arteries,
from an area of higher pressure toward an area of lower pressure. If
blood is to flow from the veins back into the heart, the pressure in the
veins must be greater than the pressure in the atria of the heart. Two
factors help maintain this pressure gradient between the veins and the
heart. First, the pressure in the atria during diastole is very low,
often approaching zero when the atria are relaxed (atrial diastole).
Second, two physiologic “pumps” increase pressure in the venous system.
The use of the term “pump” implies a physical device that speeds flow.
These physiological pumps are less obvious.
{: #fs-id1370578}

<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1123323" markdown="1">
## Skeletal Muscle Pump
{: data-type="title"}

In many body regions, the pressure within the veins can be increased by
the contraction of the surrounding skeletal muscle. This mechanism,
known as the <span data-type="term">skeletal muscle pump</span>
([\[link\]](#fig-ch21_02_06){: .autogenerated-content}), helps the
lower-pressure veins counteract the force of gravity, increasing
pressure to move blood back to the heart. As leg muscles contract, for
example during walking or running, they exert pressure on nearby veins
with their numerous one-way valves. This increased pressure causes blood
to flow upward, opening valves superior to the contracting muscles so
blood flows through. Simultaneously, valves inferior to the contracting
muscles close; thus, blood should not seep back downward toward the
feet. Military recruits are trained to flex their legs slightly while
standing at attention for prolonged periods. Failure to do so may allow
blood to pool in the lower limbs rather than returning to the heart.
Consequently, the brain will not receive enough oxygenated blood, and
the individual may lose consciousness.
{: #fs-id1429887}

<figure id="fig-ch21_02_06">
<div data-type="title">
Skeletal Muscle Pump
</div>
<figcaption>
The contraction of skeletal muscles surrounding a vein compresses the
blood and increases the pressure in that area. This action forces blood
closer to the heart where venous pressure is lower. Note the importance
of the one-way valves to assure that blood flows only in the proper
direction.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1505240" data-alt="The left panel shows
the structure of a skeletal muscle vein pump when the muscle is relaxed,
and the right panel shows the structure of a skeletal muscle vein pump
when the muscle is contracted."> ![The left panel shows the structure of
a skeletal muscle vein pump when the muscle is relaxed, and the right
panel shows the structure of a skeletal muscle vein pump when the muscle
is contracted.](../resources/2114_Skeletal_Muscle_Vein_Pump.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="380"} </span>
</figure>
</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id2505599" markdown="1">
## Respiratory Pump
{: data-type="title"}

The <span data-type="term">respiratory pump</span> aids blood flow
through the veins of the thorax and abdomen. During inhalation, the
volume of the thorax increases, largely through the contraction of the
diaphragm, which moves downward and compresses the abdominal cavity. The
elevation of the chest caused by the contraction of the external
intercostal muscles also contributes to the increased volume of the
thorax. The volume increase causes air pressure within the thorax to
decrease, allowing us to inhale. Additionally, as air pressure within
the thorax drops, blood pressure in the thoracic veins also decreases,
falling below the pressure in the abdominal veins. This causes blood to
flow along its pressure gradient from veins outside the thorax, where
pressure is higher, into the thoracic region, where pressure is now
lower. This in turn promotes the return of blood from the thoracic veins
to the atria. During exhalation, when air pressure increases within the
thoracic cavity, pressure in the thoracic veins increases, speeding
blood flow into the heart while valves in the veins prevent blood from
flowing backward from the thoracic and abdominal veins.
{: #fs-id3077328}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1883511" markdown="1">
## Pressure Relationships in the Venous System
{: data-type="title"}

Although vessel diameter increases from the smaller venules to the
larger veins and eventually to the venae cavae (singular = vena cava),
the total cross-sectional area actually decreases (see
[\[link\]](#fig-ch21_02_06){: .autogenerated-content}**a**{:
data-effect="bold"} and **b**{: data-effect="bold"}). The individual
veins are larger in diameter than the venules, but their total number is
much lower, so their total cross-sectional area is also lower.
{: #fs-id2881810}

Also notice that, as blood moves from venules to veins, the average
blood pressure drops (see [\[link\]](#fig-ch21_02_06){:
.autogenerated-content}**c**{: data-effect="bold"}), but the blood
velocity actually increases (see [\[link\]](#fig-ch21_02_06){:
.autogenerated-content}). This pressure gradient drives blood back
toward the heart. Again, the presence of one-way valves and the skeletal
muscle and respiratory pumps contribute to this increased flow. Since
approximately 64 percent of the total blood volume resides in systemic
veins, any action that increases the flow of blood through the veins
will increase venous return to the heart. Maintaining vascular tone
within the veins prevents the veins from merely distending, dampening
the flow of blood, and as you will see, vasoconstriction actually
enhances the flow.
{: #fs-id1884204}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1393145" markdown="1">
## The Role of Venoconstriction in Resistance, Blood Pressure, and Flow
{: data-type="title"}

As previously discussed, vasoconstriction of an artery or arteriole
decreases the radius, increasing resistance and pressure, but decreasing
flow. Venoconstriction, on the other hand, has a very different outcome.
The walls of veins are thin but irregular; thus, when the smooth muscle
in those walls constricts, the lumen becomes more rounded. The more
rounded the lumen, the less surface area the blood encounters, and the
less resistance the vessel offers. Vasoconstriction increases pressure
within a vein as it does in an artery, but in veins, the increased
pressure increases flow. Recall that the pressure in the atria, into
which the venous blood will flow, is very low, approaching zero for at
least part of the relaxation phase of the cardiac cycle. Thus,
venoconstriction increases the return of blood to the heart. Another way
of stating this is that venoconstriction increases the preload or
stretch of the cardiac muscle and increases contraction.
{: #fs-id1856859}

</section>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2022970" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

Blood flow is the movement of blood through a vessel, tissue, or organ.
The slowing or blocking of blood flow is called resistance. Blood
pressure is the force that blood exerts upon the walls of the blood
vessels or chambers of the heart. The components of blood pressure
include systolic pressure, which results from ventricular contraction,
and diastolic pressure, which results from ventricular relaxation. Pulse
pressure is the difference between systolic and diastolic measures, and
mean arterial pressure is the “average” pressure of blood in the
arterial system, driving blood into the tissues. Pulse, the expansion
and recoiling of an artery, reflects the heartbeat. The variables
affecting blood flow and blood pressure in the systemic circulation are
cardiac output, compliance, blood volume, blood viscosity, and the
length and diameter of the blood vessels. In the arterial system,
vasodilation and vasoconstriction of the arterioles is a significant
factor in systemic blood pressure: Slight vasodilation greatly decreases
resistance and increases flow, whereas slight vasoconstriction greatly
increases resistance and decreases flow. In the arterial system, as
resistance increases, blood pressure increases and flow decreases. In
the venous system, constriction increases blood pressure as it does in
arteries; the increasing pressure helps to return blood to the heart. In
addition, constriction causes the vessel lumen to become more rounded,
decreasing resistance and increasing blood flow. Venoconstriction, while
less important than arterial vasoconstriction, works with the skeletal
muscle pump, the respiratory pump, and their valves to promote venous
return to the heart.
{: #fs-id2051055}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1496613" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2952734">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2008912" markdown="1">
In a blood pressure measurement of 110/70, the number 70 is the
________.
{: #fs-id2121807}

1.  systolic pressure
2.  diastolic pressure
3.  pulse pressure
4.  mean arterial pressure
{: #fs-id2911392 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1717599" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id3244276}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1335632">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2680053" markdown="1">
A healthy elastic artery ________.
{: #fs-id1609868}

1.  is compliant
2.  reduces blood flow
3.  is a resistance artery
4.  has a thin wall and irregular lumen
{: #fs-id1598924 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2480816" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id2112461}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1612130">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1389754" markdown="1">
Which of the following statements is *true*{: data-effect="italics"}?
{: #fs-id2111316}

1.  The longer the vessel, the lower the resistance and the greater the
    flow.
2.  As blood volume decreases, blood pressure and blood flow also
    decrease.
3.  Increased viscosity increases blood flow.
4.  All of the above are true.
{: #fs-id2162063 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1253738" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id2176132}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2472731">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id3001510" markdown="1">
Slight vasodilation in an arteriole prompts a ________.
{: #fs-id1998544}

1.  slight increase in resistance
2.  huge increase in resistance
3.  slight decrease in resistance
4.  huge decrease in resistance
{: #fs-id1873915 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2212601" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id2677605}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2173498">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1270289" markdown="1">
Venoconstriction increases which of the following?
{: #fs-id1608664}

1.  blood pressure within the vein
2.  blood flow within the vein
3.  return of blood to the heart
4.  all of the above
{: #fs-id2472463 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id3242095" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id2705386}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2033649" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2727302">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2008766" markdown="1">
You measure a patient’s blood pressure at 130/85. Calculate the
patient’s pulse pressure and mean arterial pressure. Determine whether
each pressure is low, normal, or high.
{: #fs-id2165845}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1507328" data-label="" markdown="1">
The patient’s pulse pressure is 130 – 85 = 45 mm Hg. Generally, a pulse
pressure should be at least 25 percent of the systolic pressure, but not
more than 100 mm Hg. Since 25 percent of 130 = 32.5, the patient’s pulse
pressure of 45 is normal. The patient’s mean arterial pressure is 85 +
1/3 (45) = 85 + 15 = 100. Normally, the mean arterial blood pressure
falls within the range of 70 – 110 mmHg, so 100 is normal.
{: #fs-id2042901}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1478468">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2880339" markdown="1">
An obese patient comes to the clinic complaining of swollen feet and
ankles, fatigue, shortness of breath, and often feeling “spaced out.”
She is a cashier in a grocery store, a job that requires her to stand
all day. Outside of work, she engages in no physical activity. She
confesses that, because of her weight, she finds even walking
uncomfortable. Explain how the skeletal muscle pump might play a role in
this patient’s signs and symptoms.
{: #fs-id1629220}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1765683" data-label="" markdown="1">
People who stand upright all day and are inactive overall have very
little skeletal muscle activity in the legs. Pooling of blood in the
legs and feet is common. Venous return to the heart is reduced, a
condition that in turn reduces cardiac output and therefore oxygenation
of tissues throughout the body. This could at least partially account
for the patient’s fatigue and shortness of breath, as well as her
“spaced out” feeling, which commonly reflects reduced oxygen to the
brain.
{: #fs-id1442742}

</div>
</div>
</section>



