---
title: Development of Blood Vessels and Fetal Circulation
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Describe the development of blood vessels
* Describe the fetal circulation

</div>
In a developing embryo,the heart has developed enough by day 21
post-fertilization to begin beating. Circulation patterns are clearly
established by the fourth week of embryonic life. It is critical to the
survival of the developing human that the circulatory system forms early
to supply the growing tissue with nutrients and gases, and to remove
waste products. Blood cells and vessel production in structures outside
the embryo proper called the yolk sac, chorion, and connecting stalk
begin about 15 to 16 days following fertilization. Development of these
circulatory elements within the embryo itself begins approximately 2
days later. You will learn more about the formation and function of
these early structures when you study the chapter on development. During
those first few weeks, blood vessels begin to form from the embryonic
mesoderm. The precursor cells are known as <span
data-type="term">hemangioblasts</span>. These in turn differentiate into
<span data-type="term">angioblasts</span>, which give rise to the blood
vessels and pluripotent stem cells, which differentiate into the formed
elements of blood. (Seek additional content for more detail on fetal
development and circulation.) Together, these cells form masses known as
<span data-type="term">blood islands</span> scattered throughout the
embryonic disc. Spaces appear on the blood islands that develop into
vessel lumens. The endothelial lining of the vessels arise from the
angioblasts within these islands. Surrounding mesenchymal cells give
rise to the smooth muscle and connective tissue layers of the vessels.
While the vessels are developing, the pluripotent stem cells begin to
form the blood.
{: #fs-id2165158}

<span data-type="term">Vascular tubes</span> also develop on the blood
islands, and they eventually connect to one another as well as to the
developing, tubular heart. Thus, the developmental pattern, rather than
beginning from the formation of one central vessel and spreading
outward, occurs in many regions simultaneously with vessels later
joining together. This <span data-type="term">angiogenesis</span>—the
creation of new blood vessels from existing ones—continues as needed
throughout life as we grow and develop.
{: #fs-id1883512}

Blood vessel development often follows the same pattern as nerve
development and travels to the same target tissues and organs. This
occurs because the many factors directing growth of nerves also
stimulate blood vessels to follow a similar pattern. Whether a given
vessel develops into an artery or a vein is dependent upon local
concentrations of signaling proteins.
{: #fs-id3281409}

As the embryo grows within the mother’s uterus, its requirements for
nutrients and gas exchange also grow. The placenta—a circulatory organ
unique to pregnancy—develops jointly from the embryo and uterine wall
structures to fill this need. Emerging from the placenta is the <span
data-type="term">umbilical vein</span>, which carries oxygen-rich blood
from the mother to the fetal inferior vena cava via the ductus venosus
to the heart that pumps it into fetal circulation. Two <span
data-type="term">umbilical arteries</span> carry oxygen-depleted fetal
blood, including wastes and carbon dioxide, to the placenta. Remnants of
the umbilical arteries remain in the adult. (Seek additional content for
more information on the role of the placenta in fetal circulation.)
{: #fs-id3282364}

There are three major shunts—alternate paths for blood flow—found in the
circulatory system of the fetus. Two of these shunts divert blood from
the pulmonary to the systemic circuit, whereas the third connects the
umbilical vein to the inferior vena cava. The first two shunts are
critical during fetal life, when the lungs are compressed, filled with
amniotic fluid, and nonfunctional, and gas exchange is provided by the
placenta. These shunts close shortly after birth, however, when the
newborn begins to breathe. The third shunt persists a bit longer but
becomes nonfunctional once the umbilical cord is severed. The three
shunts are as follows ([\[link\]](#fig-ch21_06_01){:
.autogenerated-content}):
{: #fs-id1766849}

* The <span data-type="term">foramen ovale</span> is an opening in the
  interatrial septum that allows blood to flow from the right atrium to
  the left atrium. A valve associated with this opening prevents
  backflow of blood during the fetal period. As the newborn begins to
  breathe and blood pressure in the atria increases, this shunt closes.
  The fossa ovalis remains in the interatrial septum after birth,
  marking the location of the former foramen ovale.
* The <span data-type="term">ductus arteriosus</span> is a short,
  muscular vessel that connects the pulmonary trunk to the aorta. Most
  of the blood pumped from the right ventricle into the pulmonary trunk
  is thereby diverted into the aorta. Only enough blood reaches the
  fetal lungs to maintain the developing lung tissue. When the newborn
  takes the first breath, pressure within the lungs drops dramatically,
  and both the lungs and the pulmonary vessels expand. As the amount of
  oxygen increases, the smooth muscles in the wall of the ductus
  arteriosus constrict, sealing off the passage. Eventually, the
  muscular and endothelial components of the ductus arteriosus
  degenerate, leaving only the connective tissue component of the
  ligamentum arteriosum.
* The <span data-type="term">ductus venosus</span> is a temporary blood
  vessel that branches from the umbilical vein, allowing much of the
  freshly oxygenated blood from the placenta—the organ of gas exchange
  between the mother and fetus—to bypass the fetal liver and go directly
  to the fetal heart. The ductus venosus closes slowly during the first
  weeks of infancy and degenerates to become the ligamentum venosum.
{: #fs-id1551956}

<figure id="fig-ch21_06_01">
<div data-type="title">
Fetal Shunts
</div>
<figcaption>
The foramen ovale in the interatrial septum allows blood to flow from
the right atrium to the left atrium. The ductus arteriosus is a
temporary vessel, connecting the aorta to the pulmonary trunk. The
ductus venosus links the umbilical vein to the inferior vena cava
largely through the liver.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2154552" data-alt="This figure shows
the blood vessels in a fetus."> ![This figure shows the blood vessels in
a fetus.](../resources/2139_Fetal_Circulation.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="495"} </span>
</figure>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2104665" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

Blood vessels begin to form from the embryonic mesoderm. The precursor
hemangioblasts differentiate into angioblasts, which give rise to the
blood vessels and pluripotent stem cells that differentiate into the
formed elements of the blood. Together, these cells form blood islands
scattered throughout the embryo. Extensions known as vascular tubes
eventually connect the vascular network. As the embryo grows within the
mother’s womb, the placenta develops to supply blood rich in oxygen and
nutrients via the umbilical vein and to remove wastes in oxygen-depleted
blood via the umbilical arteries. Three major shunts found in the fetus
are the foramen ovale and ductus arteriosus, which divert blood from the
pulmonary to the systemic circuit, and the ductus venosus, which carries
freshly oxygenated blood high in nutrients to the fetal heart.
{: #fs-id1904275}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2188569" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1440150">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2093093" markdown="1">
Blood islands are ________.
{: #fs-id2213225}

1.  clusters of blood-filtering cells in the placenta
2.  masses of pluripotent stem cells scattered throughout the fetal bone
    marrow
3.  vascular tubes that give rise to the embryonic tubular heart
4.  masses of developing blood vessels and formed elements scattered
    throughout the embryonic disc
{: #fs-id1487408 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2489572" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id2286595}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2177683">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1485862" markdown="1">
Which of the following statements is true?
{: #fs-id2505708}

1.  Two umbilical veins carry oxygen-depleted blood from the fetal
    circulation to the placenta.
2.  One umbilical vein carries oxygen-rich blood from the placenta to
    the fetal heart.
3.  Two umbilical arteries carry oxygen-depleted blood to the fetal
    lungs.
4.  None of the above are true.
{: #fs-id2680877 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2004980" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id2415248}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1584918">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2002017" markdown="1">
The ductus venosus is a shunt that allows ________.
{: #fs-id1613807}

1.  fetal blood to flow from the right atrium to the left atrium
2.  fetal blood to flow from the right ventricle to the left ventricle
3.  most freshly oxygenated blood to flow into the fetal heart
4.  most oxygen-depleted fetal blood to flow directly into the fetal
    pulmonary trunk
{: #fs-id1752412 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2007395" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id1616491}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2067178" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id3090741">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2530690" markdown="1">
All tissues, including malignant tumors, need a blood supply. Explain
why drugs called angiogenesis inhibitors would be used in cancer
treatment.
{: #fs-id2800735}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2048194" data-label="" markdown="1">
Angiogenesis inhibitors are drugs that inhibit the growth of new blood
vessels. They can impede the growth of tumors by limiting their blood
supply and therefore their access to gas and nutrient exchange.
{: #fs-id2473282}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2153348">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1084917" markdown="1">
Explain the location and importance of the ductus arteriosus in fetal
circulation.
{: #fs-id1556814}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2006868" data-label="" markdown="1">
The ductus arteriosus is a blood vessel that provides a passageway
between the pulmonary trunk and the aorta during fetal life. Most blood
ejected from the fetus’ right ventricle and entering the pulmonary trunk
is diverted through this structure into the fetal aorta, thus bypassing
the fetal lungs.
{: #fs-id2165563}

</div>
</div>
</section>



