---
title: "An Overview of the Endocrine System"
layout: page
tags: debug
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
* Distinguish the types of intercellular communication, their
  importance, mechanisms, and effects
* Identify the major organs and tissues of the endocrine system and
  their location in the body

</div>
Communication is a process in which a sender transmits signals to one or
more receivers to control and coordinate actions. In the human body, two
major organ systems participate in relatively “long distance”
communication: the nervous system and the endocrine system. Together,
these two systems are primarily responsible for maintaining homeostasis
in the body.

# Neural and Endocrine Signaling

The nervous system uses two types of intercellular
communication—electrical and chemical signaling—either by the direct
action of an electrical potential, or in the latter case, through the
action of chemical neurotransmitters such as serotonin or
norepinephrine. Neurotransmitters act locally and rapidly. When an
electrical signal in the form of an action potential arrives at the
synaptic terminal, they diffuse across the synaptic cleft (the gap
between a sending neuron and a receiving neuron or muscle cell). Once
the neurotransmitters interact (bind) with receptors on the receiving
(post-synaptic) cell, the receptor stimulation is transduced into a
response such as continued electrical signaling or modification of
cellular response. The target cell responds within milliseconds of
receiving the chemical “message”; this response then ceases very quickly
once the neural signaling ends. In this way, neural communication
enables body functions that involve quick, brief actions, such as
movement, sensation, and cognition.In contrast, the <span
data-type="term">endocrine system</span> uses just one method of
communication: chemical signaling. These signals are sent by the
endocrine organs, which secrete chemicals—the <span
data-type="term">hormone</span>—into the extracellular fluid. Hormones
are transported primarily via the bloodstream throughout the body, where
they bind to receptors on target cells, inducing a characteristic
response. As a result, endocrine signaling requires more time than
neural signaling to prompt a response in target cells, though the
precise amount of time varies with different hormones. For example, the
hormones released when you are confronted with a dangerous or
frightening situation, called the fight-or-flight response, occur by the
release of adrenal hormones—epinephrine and norepinephrine—within
seconds. In contrast, it may take up to 48 hours for target cells to
respond to certain reproductive hormones.

<div data-type="note" class="anatomy interactive" data-label="" markdown="1">
<span data-type="media" data-alt="QR Code representing a URL"> ![QR Code
representing a URL](../resources/hormonebind.png){:
data-media-type="image/png"} </span>
Visit this [link][1] to watch an animation of the events that occur when
a hormone binds to a cell membrane receptor. What is the secondary
messenger made by adenylyl cyclase during the activation of liver cells
by epinephrine?

</div>
In addition, endocrine signaling is typically less specific than neural
signaling. The same hormone may play a role in a variety of different
physiological processes depending on the target cells involved. For
example, the hormone oxytocin promotes uterine contractions in women in
labor. It is also important in breastfeeding, and may be involved in the
sexual response and in feelings of emotional attachment in both males
and females.

In general, the nervous system involves quick responses to rapid changes
in the external environment, and the endocrine system is usually slower
acting—taking care of the internal environment of the body, maintaining
homeostasis, and controlling reproduction ([\[link\]](#tbl-ch18_01){:
.autogenerated-content}). So how does the fight-or-flight response that
was mentioned earlier happen so quickly if hormones are usually slower
acting? It is because the two systems are connected. It is the fast
action of the nervous system in response to the danger in the
environment that stimulates the adrenal glands to secrete their
hormones. As a result, the nervous system can cause rapid endocrine
responses to keep up with sudden changes in both the external and
internal environments when necessary.

<table id="tbl-ch18_01" summary=""><thead> <tr> <th colspan="3">Endocrine and Nervous Systems</th> </tr> <tr> <th /> <th>Endocrine system</th> <th>Nervous system</th> </tr> </thead><tbody> <tr> <td>Signaling mechanism(s)</td> <td>Chemical</td> <td>Chemical/electrical</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Primary chemical signal</td> <td>Hormones</td> <td>Neurotransmitters</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Distance traveled</td> <td>Long or short</td> <td>Always short</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Response time</td> <td>Fast or slow</td> <td>Always fast</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Environment targeted</td> <td>Internal</td> <td>Internal and external</td> </tr> </tbody></table># Structures of the Endocrine System

The endocrine system consists of cells, tissues, and organs that secrete
hormones as a primary or secondary function. The <span
data-type="term">endocrine gland</span> is the major player in this
system. The primary function of these ductless glands is to secrete
their hormones directly into the surrounding fluid. The interstitial
fluid and the blood vessels then transport the hormones throughout the
body. The endocrine system includes the pituitary, thyroid, parathyroid,
adrenal, and pineal glands ([\[link\]](#fig-ch18_01_01){:
.autogenerated-content}). Some of these glands have both endocrine and
non-endocrine functions. For example, the pancreas contains cells that
function in digestion as well as cells that secrete the hormones insulin
and glucagon, which regulate blood glucose levels. The hypothalamus,
thymus, heart, kidneys, stomach, small intestine, liver, skin, female
ovaries, and male testes are other organs that contain cells with
endocrine function. Moreover, adipose tissue has long been known to
produce hormones, and recent research has revealed that even bone tissue
has endocrine functions.

![This diagram shows the endocrine glands and cells that are located throughout the body. The endocrine system organs include the pineal gland and pituitary gland in the brain. The pituitary is located on the anterior side of the thalamus while the pineal gland is located on the posterior side of the thalamus. The thyroid gland is a butterfly-shaped gland that wraps around the trachea within the neck. Four small, disc-shaped parathyroid glands are embedded into the posterior side of the thyroid. The adrenal glands are located on top of the kidneys. The pancreas is located at the center of the abdomen. In females, the two ovaries are connected to the uterus by two long, curved, tubes in the pelvic region. In males, the two testes are located in the scrotum below the penis.](../resources/1801_The_Endocrine_System.jpg "Endocrine glands and cells are located throughout the body and play an important role in homeostasis."){: #fig-ch18_01_01 data-media-type="image/jpg" data-title="Endocrine System "}

The ductless endocrine glands are not to be confused with the body’s
<span data-type="term">exocrine system</span>, whose glands release
their secretions through ducts. Examples of exocrine glands include the
sebaceous and sweat glands of the skin. As just noted, the pancreas also
has an exocrine function: most of its cells secrete pancreatic juice
through the pancreatic and accessory ducts to the lumen of the small
intestine.

# Other Types of Chemical Signaling

In endocrine signaling, hormones secreted into the extracellular fluid
diffuse into the blood or lymph, and can then travel great distances
throughout the body. In contrast, autocrine signaling takes place within
the same cell. An <span data-type="term">autocrine</span> (auto- =
“self”) is a chemical that elicits a response in the same cell that
secreted it. Interleukin-1, or IL-1, is a signaling molecule that plays
an important role in inflammatory response. The cells that secrete IL-1
have receptors on their cell surface that bind these molecules,
resulting in autocrine signaling.

Local intercellular communication is the province of the <span
data-type="term">paracrine</span>, also called a paracrine factor, which
is a chemical that induces a response in neighboring cells. Although
paracrines may enter the bloodstream, their concentration is generally
too low to elicit a response from distant tissues. A familiar example to
those with asthma is histamine, a paracrine that is released by immune
cells in the bronchial tree. Histamine causes the smooth muscle cells of
the bronchi to constrict, narrowing the airways. Another example is the
neurotransmitters of the nervous system, which act only locally within
the synaptic cleft.

<div data-type="note" class="anatomy career" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Career Connections
</div>
<span data-type="title">Endocrinologist</span> Endocrinology is a
specialty in the field of medicine that focuses on the treatment of
endocrine system disorders. Endocrinologists—medical doctors who
specialize in this field—are experts in treating diseases associated
with hormonal systems, ranging from thyroid disease to diabetes
mellitus. Endocrine surgeons treat endocrine disease through the
removal, or resection, of the affected endocrine gland.

Patients who are referred to endocrinologists may have signs and
symptoms or blood test results that suggest excessive or impaired
functioning of an endocrine gland or endocrine cells. The
endocrinologist may order additional blood tests to determine whether
the patient’s hormonal levels are abnormal, or they may stimulate or
suppress the function of the suspect endocrine gland and then have blood
taken for analysis. Treatment varies according to the diagnosis. Some
endocrine disorders, such as type 2 diabetes, may respond to lifestyle
changes such as modest weight loss, adoption of a healthy diet, and
regular physical activity. Other disorders may require medication, such
as hormone replacement, and routine monitoring by the endocrinologist.
These include disorders of the pituitary gland that can affect growth
and disorders of the thyroid gland that can result in a variety of
metabolic problems.

Some patients experience health problems as a result of the normal
decline in hormones that can accompany aging. These patients can consult
with an endocrinologist to weigh the risks and benefits of hormone
replacement therapy intended to boost their natural levels of
reproductive hormones.

In addition to treating patients, endocrinologists may be involved in
research to improve the understanding of endocrine system disorders and
develop new treatments for these diseases.

</div>

# Chapter Review

The endocrine system consists of cells, tissues, and organs that secrete
hormones critical to homeostasis. The body coordinates its functions
through two major types of communication: neural and endocrine. Neural
communication includes both electrical and chemical signaling between
neurons and target cells. Endocrine communication involves chemical
signaling via the release of hormones into the extracellular fluid. From
there, hormones diffuse into the bloodstream and may travel to distant
body regions, where they elicit a response in target cells. Endocrine
glands are ductless glands that secrete hormones. Many organs of the
body with other primary functions—such as the heart, stomach, and
kidneys—also have hormone-secreting cells.

# Interactive Link Questions

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Visit this [link][1] to watch an animation of the events that occur when
a hormone binds to a cell membrane receptor. What is the secondary
messenger made by adenylyl cyclase during the activation of liver cells
by epinephrine?

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
cAMP

</div>
</div>

# Review Questions

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Endocrine glands ________.

1.  secrete hormones that travel through a duct to the target organs
2.  release neurotransmitters into the synaptic cleft
3.  secrete chemical messengers that travel in the bloodstream
4.  include sebaceous glands and sweat glands
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
C

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Chemical signaling that affects neighboring cells is called ________.

1.  autocrine
2.  paracrine
3.  endocrine
4.  neuron
{: data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
B

</div>
</div>

# Critical Thinking Questions

<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Describe several main differences in the communication methods used by
the endocrine system and the nervous system.

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
The endocrine system uses chemical signals called hormones to convey
information from one part of the body to a distant part of the body.
Hormones are released from the endocrine cell into the extracellular
environment, but then travel in the bloodstream to target tissues. This
communication and response can take seconds to days. In contrast,
neurons transmit electrical signals along their axons. At the axon
terminal, the electrical signal prompts the release of a chemical signal
called a neurotransmitter that carries the message across the synaptic
cleft to elicit a response in the neighboring cell. This method of
communication is nearly instantaneous, of very brief duration, and is
highly specific.

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Compare and contrast endocrine and exocrine glands.

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
Endocrine glands are ductless. They release their secretion into the
surrounding fluid, from which it enters the bloodstream or lymph to
travel to distant cells. Moreover, the secretions of endocrine glands
are hormones. Exocrine glands release their secretions through a duct
that delivers the secretion to the target location. Moreover, the
secretions of exocrine glands are not hormones, but compounds that have
an immediate physiologic function. For example, pancreatic juice
contains enzymes that help digest food.

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
True or false: Neurotransmitters are a special class of paracrines.
Explain your answer.

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
True. Neurotransmitters can be classified as paracrines because, upon
their release from a neuron’s axon terminals, they travel across a
microscopically small cleft to exert their effect on a nearby neuron or
muscle cell.

</div>
</div>



[1]: http://openstaxcollege.org/l/hormonebind
