---
title: The Pituitary Gland and Hypothalamus
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Explain the interrelationships of the anatomy and functions of the
  hypothalamus and the posterior and anterior lobes of the pituitary
  gland
* Identify the two hormones released from the posterior pituitary, their
  target cells, and their principal actions
* Identify the six hormones produced by the anterior lobe of the
  pituitary gland, their target cells, their principal actions, and
  their regulation by the hypothalamus

</div>
The hypothalamus–pituitary complex can be thought of as the “command
center” of the endocrine system. This complex secretes several hormones
that directly produce responses in target tissues, as well as hormones
that regulate the synthesis and secretion of hormones of other glands.
In addition, the hypothalamus–pituitary complex coordinates the messages
of the endocrine and nervous systems. In many cases, a stimulus received
by the nervous system must pass through the hypothalamus–pituitary
complex to be translated into hormones that can initiate a response.
{: #fs-id2955108}

The <span data-type="term">hypothalamus</span> is a structure of the
diencephalon of the brain located anterior and inferior to the thalamus
([\[link\]](#fig-ch18_03_01){: .autogenerated-content}). It has both
neural and endocrine functions, producing and secreting many hormones.
In addition, the hypothalamus is anatomically and functionally related
to the <span data-type="term">pituitary gland</span> (or hypophysis), a
bean-sized organ suspended from it by a stem called the <span
data-type="term">infundibulum</span> (or pituitary stalk). The pituitary
gland is cradled within the sellaturcica of the sphenoid bone of the
skull. It consists of two lobes that arise from distinct parts of
embryonic tissue: the posterior pituitary (neurohypophysis) is neural
tissue, whereas the anterior pituitary (also known as the
adenohypophysis) is glandular tissue that develops from the primitive
digestive tract. The hormones secreted by the posterior and anterior
pituitary, and the intermediate zone between the lobes are summarized in
[\[link\]](#tbl-ch18_03){: .autogenerated-content}.
{: #eip-577}

<figure id="fig-ch18_03_01">
<div data-type="title">
Hypothalamus–Pituitary Complex
</div>
<figcaption>
The hypothalamus region lies inferior and anterior to the thalamus. It
connects to the pituitary gland by the stalk-like infundibulum. The
pituitary gland consists of an anterior and posterior lobe, with each
lobe secreting different hormones in response to signals from the
hypothalamus.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1511934" data-alt="This illustration
shows the hypothalamus-pituitary complex, which is located at the base
of the brain and shown here from a lateral view. The hypothalamus lies
inferior and anterior to the thalamus, which is sits atop the brainstem.
The hypothalamus connects to the pituitary gland by the stalk-like
infundibulum. The pituitary gland looks like a sac containing two balls
hanging from the infundibulum. The &#x201C;balls&#x201D; are the
anterior and posterior lobes of the pituitary. Each lobe secretes
different hormones in response to signals from the hypothalamus.">
![This illustration shows the hypothalamus-pituitary complex, which is
located at the base of the brain and shown here from a lateral view. The
hypothalamus lies inferior and anterior to the thalamus, which is sits
atop the brainstem. The hypothalamus connects to the pituitary gland by
the stalk-like infundibulum. The pituitary gland looks like a sac
containing two balls hanging from the infundibulum. The
&#x201C;balls&#x201D; are the anterior and posterior lobes of the
pituitary. Each lobe secretes different hormones in response to signals
from the
hypothalamus.](../resources/1806_The_Hypothalamus-Pituitary_Complex.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="520"} </span>
</figure>
<table id="tbl-ch18_03" summary=""><thead> <tr> <th colspan="4">Pituitary Hormones</th> </tr> <tr> <th>Pituitary lobe</th> <th>Associated hormones</th> <th>Chemical class</th> <th>Effect</th> </tr> </thead><tbody> <tr> <td>Anterior</td> <td>Growth hormone (GH)</td> <td>Protein</td> <td>Promotes growth of body tissues</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Anterior</td> <td>Prolactin (PRL)</td> <td>Peptide</td> <td>Promotes milk production from mammary glands</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Anterior</td> <td>Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)</td> <td>Glycoprotein</td> <td>Stimulates thyroid hormone release from thyroid</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Anterior</td> <td>Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)</td> <td>Peptide</td> <td>Stimulates hormone release by adrenal cortex</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Anterior</td> <td>Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)</td> <td>Glycoprotein</td> <td>Stimulates gamete production in gonads</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Anterior</td> <td>Luteinizing hormone (LH)</td> <td>Glycoprotein</td> <td>Stimulates androgen production by gonads</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Posterior</td> <td>Antidiuretic hormone (ADH)</td> <td>Peptide</td> <td>Stimulates water reabsorption by kidneys</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Posterior</td> <td>Oxytocin</td> <td>Peptide</td> <td>Stimulates uterine contractions during childbirth</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Intermediate zone</td> <td>Melanocyte-stimulating hormone</td> <td>Peptide</td> <td>Stimulates melanin formation in melanocytes</td> </tr> </tbody></table>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2812331" markdown="1">
# Posterior Pituitary
{: data-type="title"}

The posterior pituitary is actually an extension of the neurons of the
paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei of the hypothalamus. The cell
bodies of these regions rest in the hypothalamus, but their axons
descend as the hypothalamic–hypophyseal tract within the infundibulum,
and end in axon terminals that comprise the posterior pituitary
([\[link\]](#fig-ch18_03_02){: .autogenerated-content}).
{: #eip-118}

<figure id="fig-ch18_03_02">
<div data-type="title">
Posterior Pituitary
</div>
<figcaption>
Neurosecretory cells in the hypothalamus release oxytocin (OT) or ADH
into the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland. These hormones are
stored or released into the blood via the capillary plexus.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1286931" data-alt="This illustration
zooms in on the hypothalamus and the attached pituitary gland. The
posterior pituitary is highlighted. Two nuclei in the hypothalamus
contain neurosecretory cells that release different hormones. The
neurosecretory cells of the paraventricular nucleus release oxytocin
(OT) while the neurosecretory cells of the supraoptic nucleus release
anti-diuretic hormone (ADH). The neurosecretory cells stretch down the
infundibulum into the posterior pituitary. The tube-like extensions of
the neurosecretory cells within the infundibulum are labeled the
hypothalamophypophyseal tracts. These tracts connect with a web-like
network of blood vessels in the posterior pituitary called the capillary
plexus. From the capillary plexus, the posterior pituitary secretes the
OT or ADH into a single vein that exits the pituitary."> ![This
illustration zooms in on the hypothalamus and the attached pituitary
gland. The posterior pituitary is highlighted. Two nuclei in the
hypothalamus contain neurosecretory cells that release different
hormones. The neurosecretory cells of the paraventricular nucleus
release oxytocin (OT) while the neurosecretory cells of the supraoptic
nucleus release anti-diuretic hormone (ADH). The neurosecretory cells
stretch down the infundibulum into the posterior pituitary. The
tube-like extensions of the neurosecretory cells within the infundibulum
are labeled the hypothalamophypophyseal tracts. These tracts connect
with a web-like network of blood vessels in the posterior pituitary
called the capillary plexus. From the capillary plexus, the posterior
pituitary secretes the OT or ADH into a single vein that exits the
pituitary.](../resources/1807_The_Posterior_Pituitary_Complex.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="520"} </span>
</figure>
The posterior pituitary gland does not produce hormones, but rather
stores and secretes hormones produced by the hypothalamus. The
paraventricular nuclei produce the hormone oxytocin, whereas the
supraoptic nuclei produce ADH. These hormones travel along the axons
into storage sites in the axon terminals of the posterior pituitary. In
response to signals from the same hypothalamic neurons, the hormones are
released from the axon terminals into the bloodstream.
{: #fs-id1953873}

<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1959647" markdown="1">
## Oxytocin
{: data-type="title"}

When fetal development is complete, the peptide-derived hormone <span
data-type="term">oxytocin</span> (tocia- = “childbirth”) stimulates
uterine contractions and dilation of the cervix. Throughout most of
pregnancy, oxytocin hormone receptors are not expressed at high levels
in the uterus. Toward the end of pregnancy, the synthesis of oxytocin
receptors in the uterus increases, and the smooth muscle cells of the
uterus become more sensitive to its effects. Oxytocin is continually
released throughout childbirth through a positive feedback mechanism. As
noted earlier, oxytocin prompts uterine contractions that push the fetal
head toward the cervix. In response, cervical stretching stimulates
additional oxytocin to be synthesized by the hypothalamus and released
from the pituitary. This increases the intensity and effectiveness of
uterine contractions and prompts additional dilation of the cervix. The
feedback loop continues until birth.
{: #fs-id1293634}

Although the mother’s high blood levels of oxytocin begin to decrease
immediately following birth, oxytocin continues to play a role in
maternal and newborn health. First, oxytocin is necessary for the milk
ejection reflex (commonly referred to as “let-down”) in breastfeeding
women. As the newborn begins suckling, sensory receptors in the nipples
transmit signals to the hypothalamus. In response, oxytocin is secreted
and released into the bloodstream. Within seconds, cells in the mother’s
milk ducts contract, ejecting milk into the infant’s mouth. Secondly, in
both males and females, oxytocin is thought to contribute to
parent–newborn bonding, known as attachment. Oxytocin is also thought to
be involved in feelings of love and closeness, as well as in the sexual
response.
{: #fs-id1553818}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id2542000" markdown="1">
## Antidiuretic Hormone (ADH)
{: data-type="title"}

The solute concentration of the blood, or blood osmolarity, may change
in response to the consumption of certain foods and fluids, as well as
in response to disease, injury, medications, or other factors. Blood
osmolarity is constantly monitored by <span
data-type="term">osmoreceptors</span>—specialized cells within the
hypothalamus that are particularly sensitive to the concentration of
sodium ions and other solutes.
{: #fs-id1466614}

In response to high blood osmolarity, which can occur during dehydration
or following a very salty meal, the osmoreceptors signal the posterior
pituitary to release <span data-type="term">antidiuretic hormone
(ADH)</span>. The target cells of ADH are located in the tubular cells
of the kidneys. Its effect is to increase epithelial permeability to
water, allowing increased water reabsorption. The more water reabsorbed
from the filtrate, the greater the amount of water that is returned to
the blood and the less that is excreted in the urine. A greater
concentration of water results in a reduced concentration of solutes.
ADH is also known as vasopressin because, in very high concentrations,
it causes constriction of blood vessels, which increases blood pressure
by increasing peripheral resistance. The release of ADH is controlled by
a negative feedback loop. As blood osmolarity decreases, the
hypothalamic osmoreceptors sense the change and prompt a corresponding
decrease in the secretion of ADH. As a result, less water is reabsorbed
from the urine filtrate.
{: #fs-id1715012}

Interestingly, drugs can affect the secretion of ADH. For example,
alcohol consumption inhibits the release of ADH, resulting in increased
urine production that can eventually lead to dehydration and a hangover.
A disease called diabetes insipidus is characterized by chronic
underproduction of ADH that causes chronic dehydration. Because little
ADH is produced and secreted, not enough water is reabsorbed by the
kidneys. Although patients feel thirsty, and increase their fluid
consumption, this doesn’t effectively decrease the solute concentration
in their blood because ADH levels are not high enough to trigger water
reabsorption in the kidneys. Electrolyte imbalances can occur in severe
cases of diabetes insipidus.
{: #fs-id2166145}

</section>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1128366" markdown="1">
# Anterior Pituitary
{: data-type="title"}

The anterior pituitary originates from the digestive tract in the embryo
and migrates toward the brain during fetal development. There are three
regions: the pars distalis is the most anterior, the pars intermedia is
adjacent to the posterior pituitary, and the pars tuberalis is a slender
“tube” that wraps the infundibulum.
{: #fs-id1125844}

Recall that the posterior pituitary does not synthesize hormones, but
merely stores them. In contrast, the anterior pituitary does manufacture
hormones. However, the secretion of hormones from the anterior pituitary
is regulated by two classes of hormones. These hormones—secreted by the
hypothalamus—are the releasing hormones that stimulate the secretion of
hormones from the anterior pituitary and the inhibiting hormones that
inhibit secretion.
{: #fs-id1205735}

Hypothalamic hormones are secreted by neurons, but enter the anterior
pituitary through blood vessels ([\[link\]](#fig-ch18_03_03){:
.autogenerated-content}). Within the infundibulum is a bridge of
capillaries that connects the hypothalamus to the anterior pituitary.
This network, called the <span data-type="term">hypophyseal portal
system</span>, allows hypothalamic hormones to be transported to the
anterior pituitary without first entering the systemic circulation. The
system originates from the superior hypophyseal artery, which branches
off the carotid arteries and transports blood to the hypothalamus. The
branches of the superior hypophyseal artery form the hypophyseal portal
system (see [\[link\]](#fig-ch18_03_03){: .autogenerated-content}).
Hypothalamic releasing and inhibiting hormones travel through a primary
capillary plexus to the portal veins, which carry them into the anterior
pituitary. Hormones produced by the anterior pituitary (in response to
releasing hormones) enter a secondary capillary plexus, and from there
drain into the circulation.
{: #fs-id1211186}

<figure id="fig-ch18_03_03">
<div data-type="title">
Anterior Pituitary
</div>
<figcaption>
The anterior pituitary manufactures seven hormones. The hypothalamus
produces separate hormones that stimulate or inhibit hormone production
in the anterior pituitary. Hormones from the hypothalamus reach the
anterior pituitary via the hypophyseal portal system.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2811906" data-alt="This illustration
zooms in on the hypothalamus and the attached pituitary gland. The
anterior pituitary is highlighted. Three neurosecretory cells are
secreting hormones into a web-like network of arteries within the
infundibulum. The artery net is labeled the primary capillary plexus of
the hypophyseal portal system. The superior hypophysel artery enters the
primary capillary plexus from outside of the infundibulum. The
hypophyseal portal vein runs down from the primary capillary plexus,
through the infundibulum, and connects to the secondary capillary plexus
of the hypophyseal portal system. The secondary capillary plexus is
located within the anterior pituitary. The hormones released from the
neurosecretory cells of the hypothalamus travel through the primary
capillary plexus, down the hypophyseal portal vein, and into the
secondary capillary plexus. There, the hypothalamus hormones stimulate
the anterior pituitary to release its hormones. The anterior pituitary
hormones leave the primary capillary plexus from a single vein at the
bottom of the anterior lobe."> ![This illustration zooms in on the
hypothalamus and the attached pituitary gland. The anterior pituitary is
highlighted. Three neurosecretory cells are secreting hormones into a
web-like network of arteries within the infundibulum. The artery net is
labeled the primary capillary plexus of the hypophyseal portal system.
The superior hypophysel artery enters the primary capillary plexus from
outside of the infundibulum. The hypophyseal portal vein runs down from
the primary capillary plexus, through the infundibulum, and connects to
the secondary capillary plexus of the hypophyseal portal system. The
secondary capillary plexus is located within the anterior pituitary. The
hormones released from the neurosecretory cells of the hypothalamus
travel through the primary capillary plexus, down the hypophyseal portal
vein, and into the secondary capillary plexus. There, the hypothalamus
hormones stimulate the anterior pituitary to release its hormones. The
anterior pituitary hormones leave the primary capillary plexus from a
single vein at the bottom of the anterior
lobe.](../resources/1808_The_Anterior_Pituitary_Complex.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="520"} </span>
</figure>
The anterior pituitary produces seven hormones. These are the growth
hormone (GH), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone
(LH), beta endorphin, and prolactin. Of the hormones of the anterior
pituitary, TSH, ACTH, FSH, and LH are collectively referred to as tropic
hormones (trope- = “turning”) because they turn on or off the function
of other endocrine glands.
{: #fs-id2092251}

<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id2032733" markdown="1">
## Growth Hormone
{: data-type="title"}

The endocrine system regulates the growth of the human body, protein
synthesis, and cellular replication. A major hormone involved in this
process is <span data-type="term">growth hormone (GH)</span>, also
called somatotropin—a protein hormone produced and secreted by the
anterior pituitary gland. Its primary function is anabolic; it promotes
protein synthesis and tissue building through direct and indirect
mechanisms ([\[link\]](#fig-ch18_03_04){: .autogenerated-content}). GH
levels are controlled by the release of GHRH and GHIH (also known as
somatostatin) from the hypothalamus.
{: #fs-id1141648}

<figure id="fig-ch18_03_04">
<div data-type="title">
Hormonal Regulation of Growth
</div>
<figcaption>
Growth hormone (GH) directly accelerates the rate of protein synthesis
in skeletal muscle and bones. Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) is
activated by growth hormone and indirectly supports the formation of new
proteins in muscle cells and bone.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1495277" data-alt="This flow chart
illustrates the hormone cascade that stimulates human growth. In step 1,
the hypothalamus releases growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH). GHRH
travels into the primary capillary plexus of the anterior pituitary,
where it stimulates the anterior pituitary to release growth hormone
(GH). The release of growth hormone causes three types of effects. In
the glucose-sparing effect, GH stimulates adipose cells to break down
stored fat, fueling the growth effects (discussed next). The target
cells for the glucose-sparing effects are adipose cells. In the growth
effects, GH increases the uptake of amino acids from the blood and
enhances cellular proliferation while also reducing apoptosis. The
target cells for the growth effects are bone cells, muscle cells,
nervous system cells, and immune system cells. In the diabetogenic
effect, GH stimulates the liver to break down glycogen into glucose,
fueling the growth effects. The liver also releases IGF in response to
GH. The IGF further stimulates the growth effects but also negatively
feeds back to the hypothalamus. When high IGF one levels are perceived
by the hypothalamus, it releases growth hormone inhibiting hormone
(GHIH). GHIH inhibits GH release by the anterior pituitary."> ![This
flow chart illustrates the hormone cascade that stimulates human growth.
In step 1, the hypothalamus releases growth hormone-releasing hormone
(GHRH). GHRH travels into the primary capillary plexus of the anterior
pituitary, where it stimulates the anterior pituitary to release growth
hormone (GH). The release of growth hormone causes three types of
effects. In the glucose-sparing effect, GH stimulates adipose cells to
break down stored fat, fueling the growth effects (discussed next). The
target cells for the glucose-sparing effects are adipose cells. In the
growth effects, GH increases the uptake of amino acids from the blood
and enhances cellular proliferation while also reducing apoptosis. The
target cells for the growth effects are bone cells, muscle cells,
nervous system cells, and immune system cells. In the diabetogenic
effect, GH stimulates the liver to break down glycogen into glucose,
fueling the growth effects. The liver also releases IGF in response to
GH. The IGF further stimulates the growth effects but also negatively
feeds back to the hypothalamus. When high IGF one levels are perceived
by the hypothalamus, it releases growth hormone inhibiting hormone
(GHIH). GHIH inhibits GH release by the anterior
pituitary.](../resources/1809_Hormonal_Regulation_of_Growth.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="550"} </span>
</figure>
A glucose-sparing effect occurs when GH stimulates lipolysis, or the
breakdown of adipose tissue, releasing fatty acids into the blood. As a
result, many tissues switch from glucose to fatty acids as their main
energy source, which means that less glucose is taken up from the
bloodstream.
{: #fs-id1211400}

GH also initiates the diabetogenic effect in which GH stimulates the
liver to break down glycogen to glucose, which is then deposited into
the blood. The name “diabetogenic” is derived from the similarity in
elevated blood glucose levels observed between individuals with
untreated diabetes mellitus and individuals experiencing GH excess.
Blood glucose levels rise as the result of a combination of
glucose-sparing and diabetogenic effects.
{: #fs-id1129064}

GH indirectly mediates growth and protein synthesis by triggering the
liver and other tissues to produce a group of proteins called <span
data-type="term">insulin-like growth factors (IGFs)</span>. These
proteins enhance cellular proliferation and inhibit apoptosis, or
programmed cell death. IGFs stimulate cells to increase their uptake of
amino acids from the blood for protein synthesis. Skeletal muscle and
cartilage cells are particularly sensitive to stimulation from IGFs.
{: #fs-id890504}

Dysfunction of the endocrine system’s control of growth can result in
several disorders. For example, <span data-type="term">gigantism</span>
is a disorder in children that is caused by the secretion of abnormally
large amounts of GH, resulting in excessive growth. A similar condition
in adults is <span data-type="term">acromegaly</span>, a disorder that
results in the growth of bones in the face, hands, and feet in response
to excessive levels of GH in individuals who have stopped growing.
Abnormally low levels of GH in children can cause growth impairment—a
disorder called <span data-type="term">pituitary dwarfism</span> (also
known as growth hormone deficiency).
{: #fs-id1243625}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1530809" markdown="1">
## Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone
{: data-type="title"}

The activity of the thyroid gland is regulated by <span
data-type="term">thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)</span>, also called
thyrotropin. TSH is released from the anterior pituitary in response to
thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) from the hypothalamus. As discussed
shortly, it triggers the secretion of thyroid hormones by the thyroid
gland. In a classic negative feedback loop, elevated levels of thyroid
hormones in the bloodstream then trigger a drop in production of TRH and
subsequently TSH.
{: #fs-id2161906}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1858657" markdown="1">
## Adrenocorticotropic Hormone
{: data-type="title"}

The <span data-type="term">adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)</span>,
also called corticotropin, stimulates the adrenal cortex (the more
superficial “bark” of the adrenal glands) to secrete corticosteroid
hormones such as cortisol. ACTH come from a precursor molecule known as
pro-opiomelanotropin (POMC) which produces several biologically active
molecules when cleaved, including ACTH, melanocyte-stimulating hormone,
and the brain opioid peptides known as endorphins.
{: #fs-id1454333}

The release of ACTH is regulated by the corticotropin-releasing hormone
(CRH) from the hypothalamus in response to normal physiologic rhythms. A
variety of stressors can also influence its release, and the role of
ACTH in the stress response is discussed later in this chapter.
{: #fs-id1836686}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1226102" markdown="1">
## Follicle-Stimulating Hormone and Luteinizing Hormone
{: data-type="title"}

The endocrine glands secrete a variety of hormones that control the
development and regulation of the reproductive system (these glands
include the anterior pituitary, the adrenal cortex, and the gonads—the
testes in males and the ovaries in females). Much of the development of
the reproductive system occurs during puberty and is marked by the
development of sex-specific characteristics in both male and female
adolescents. Puberty is initiated by gonadotropin-releasing hormone
(GnRH), a hormone produced and secreted by the hypothalamus. GnRH
stimulates the anterior pituitary to secrete <span
data-type="term">gonadotropins</span>—hormones that regulate the
function of the gonads. The levels of GnRH are regulated through a
negative feedback loop; high levels of reproductive hormones inhibit the
release of GnRH. Throughout life, gonadotropins regulate reproductive
function and, in the case of women, the onset and cessation of
reproductive capacity.
{: #fs-id1863730}

The gonadotropins include two glycoprotein hormones: <span
data-type="term">follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)</span> stimulates
the production and maturation of sex cells, or gametes, including ova in
women and sperm in men. FSH also promotes follicular growth; these
follicles then release estrogens in the female ovaries. <span
data-type="term">Luteinizing hormone (LH)</span> triggers ovulation in
women, as well as the production of estrogens and progesterone by the
ovaries. LH stimulates production of testosterone by the male testes.
{: #fs-id1053044}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1494868" markdown="1">
## Prolactin
{: data-type="title"}

As its name implies, <span data-type="term">prolactin (PRL)</span>
promotes lactation (milk production) in women. During pregnancy, it
contributes to development of the mammary glands, and after birth, it
stimulates the mammary glands to produce breast milk. However, the
effects of prolactin depend heavily upon the permissive effects of
estrogens, progesterone, and other hormones. And as noted earlier, the
let-down of milk occurs in response to stimulation from oxytocin.
{: #fs-id2582199}

In a non-pregnant woman, prolactin secretion is inhibited by
prolactin-inhibiting hormone (PIH), which is actually the
neurotransmitter dopamine, and is released from neurons in the
hypothalamus. Only during pregnancy do prolactin levels rise in response
to prolactin-releasing hormone (PRH) from the hypothalamus.
{: #fs-id1863415}

</section>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1303847" markdown="1">
# Intermediate Pituitary: Melanocyte-Stimulating Hormone
{: data-type="title"}

The cells in the zone between the pituitary lobes secrete a hormone
known as melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH) that is formed by cleavage
of the pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) precursor protein. Local production
of MSH in the skin is responsible for melanin production in response to
UV light exposure. The role of MSH made by the pituitary is more
complicated. For instance, people with lighter skin generally have the
same amount of MSH as people with darker skin. Nevertheless, this
hormone is capable of darkening of the skin by inducing melanin
production in the skin’s melanocytes. Women also show increased MSH
production during pregnancy; in combination with estrogens, it can lead
to darker skin pigmentation, especially the skin of the areolas and
labia minora. [\[link\]](#fig-ch18_03_05){: .autogenerated-content} is a
summary of the pituitary hormones and their principal effects.
{: #fs-id2582556}

<figure id="fig-ch18_03_05">
<div data-type="title">
Major Pituitary Hormones
</div>
<figcaption>
Major pituitary hormones and their target organs.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1733167" data-alt="These two
diagrammatic tables show the major pituitary hormones, their releasing
hormone from the hypothalamus, their target organs, and their effects.
The top part of the diagram shows the posterior pituitary hormones. ADH
is produced by the hypothalamus and stored in the posterior pituitary.
The targets of ADH are the kidneys, sweat glands and circulatory system,
as this hormone affects water balance. OT is produced by the posterior
pituitary and has no releasing hormone. Its target is the female
reproductive system, as this hormone triggers uterine contractions
during childbirth. The anterior pituitary hormones are listed in the
lower diagram. The release of LH by the anterior pituitary is triggered
by the release of GNRH from the hypothalamus. The target of LH is the
reproductive system, as this hormone stimulates the production of sex
hormones by the gonads. The release of FSH by the anterior pituitary is
triggered by the release of GNRH from the hypothalamus. The target of
FSH is the reproductive system, as this hormone stimulates the
production of sperm and eggs. The release of TSH by the anterior
pituitary is triggered by the release of TRH from the hypothalamus. The
target of TSH is the thyroid gland, as this hormone stimulates the
release of thyroid hormone (TH). TH regulates metabolism. The release of
PRL by the anterior pituitary is triggered by the release of PRH and
inhibited by the release of PIH from the hypothalamus. The target of PRL
is the mammary glands, as this hormone promotes milk production. The
release of GH by the anterior pituitary is triggered by the release of
GHRH and inhibited by the release of GHIH from the hypothalamus. The
targets of GH are the liver, bones and muscles, as it induces its
targets to produce insulin-like growth factors (IGH), as this hormone
stimulates body growth and a higher metabolic rate. The release of ACTH
by the anterior pituitary is triggered by the release of CRH from the
hypothalamus. The targets of ACTH are the adrenal glands, as this
hormone induces its targets to produce glucocorticoids, which regulate
metabolism and the stress response."> ![These two diagrammatic tables
show the major pituitary hormones, their releasing hormone from the
hypothalamus, their target organs, and their effects. The top part of
the diagram shows the posterior pituitary hormones. ADH is produced by
the hypothalamus and stored in the posterior pituitary. The targets of
ADH are the kidneys, sweat glands and circulatory system, as this
hormone affects water balance. OT is produced by the posterior pituitary
and has no releasing hormone. Its target is the female reproductive
system, as this hormone triggers uterine contractions during childbirth.
The anterior pituitary hormones are listed in the lower diagram. The
release of LH by the anterior pituitary is triggered by the release of
GNRH from the hypothalamus. The target of LH is the reproductive system,
as this hormone stimulates the production of sex hormones by the gonads.
The release of FSH by the anterior pituitary is triggered by the release
of GNRH from the hypothalamus. The target of FSH is the reproductive
system, as this hormone stimulates the production of sperm and eggs. The
release of TSH by the anterior pituitary is triggered by the release of
TRH from the hypothalamus. The target of TSH is the thyroid gland, as
this hormone stimulates the release of thyroid hormone (TH). TH
regulates metabolism. The release of PRL by the anterior pituitary is
triggered by the release of PRH and inhibited by the release of PIH from
the hypothalamus. The target of PRL is the mammary glands, as this
hormone promotes milk production. The release of GH by the anterior
pituitary is triggered by the release of GHRH and inhibited by the
release of GHIH from the hypothalamus. The targets of GH are the liver,
bones and muscles, as it induces its targets to produce insulin-like
growth factors (IGH), as this hormone stimulates body growth and a
higher metabolic rate. The release of ACTH by the anterior pituitary is
triggered by the release of CRH from the hypothalamus. The targets of
ACTH are the adrenal glands, as this hormone induces its targets to
produce glucocorticoids, which regulate metabolism and the stress
response.](../resources/1810_Major_Pituitary_Hormones.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="550"} </span>
</figure>
<div data-type="note" id="fs-id2678852" class="anatomy interactive" data-label="" markdown="1">
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="eip-id1501084" data-alt="QR Code
representing a URL"> ![QR Code representing a
URL](../resources/roleofhypo.png){: data-media-type="image/jpg"
width="120"} </span>
Visit this [link][1] to watch an animation showing the role of the
hypothalamus and the pituitary gland. Which hormone is released by the
pituitary to stimulate the thyroid gland?
{: #fs-id1481306}

</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1404775" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

The hypothalamus–pituitary complex is located in the diencephalon of the
brain. The hypothalamus and the pituitary gland are connected by a
structure called the infundibulum, which contains vasculature and nerve
axons. The pituitary gland is divided into two distinct structures with
different embryonic origins. The posterior lobe houses the axon
terminals of hypothalamic neurons. It stores and releases into the
bloodstream two hypothalamic hormones: oxytocin and antidiuretic hormone
(ADH). The anterior lobe is connected to the hypothalamus by vasculature
in the infundibulum and produces and secretes six hormones. Their
secretion is regulated, however, by releasing and inhibiting hormones
from the hypothalamus. The six anterior pituitary hormones are: growth
hormone (GH), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone
(LH), and prolactin (PRL).
{: #fs-id1524394}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1524427" class="interactive-exercise" markdown="1">
# Interactive Link Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1495328">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1493768" markdown="1">
Visit this [link][1] to watch an animation showing the role of the
hypothalamus and the pituitary gland. Which hormone is released by the
pituitary to stimulate the thyroid gland?
{: #fs-id1955807}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1315643" data-label="" markdown="1">
Thyroid-stimulating hormone.
{: #fs-id1436858}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1804728" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2593908">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1098349" markdown="1">
The hypothalamus is functionally and anatomically connected to the
posterior pituitary lobe by a bridge of ________.
{: #fs-id1146501}

1.  blood vessels
2.  nerve axons
3.  cartilage
4.  bone
{: #fs-id1509674 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1967983" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id1318539}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1085968">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1120497" markdown="1">
Which of the following is an anterior pituitary hormone?
{: #fs-id1142190}

1.  ADH
2.  oxytocin
3.  TSH
4.  cortisol
{: #fs-id2563329 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1199172" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id1533571}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1932618">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2007817" markdown="1">
How many hormones are produced by the posterior pituitary?
{: #fs-id1230543}

1.  0
2.  1
3.  2
4.  6
{: #fs-id1514304 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1476424" data-label="" markdown="1">
A
{: #fs-id1056144}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1120911">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1106694" markdown="1">
Which of the following hormones contributes to the regulation of the
body’s fluid and electrolyte balance?
{: #fs-id1543336}

1.  adrenocorticotropic hormone
2.  antidiuretic hormone
3.  luteinizing hormone
4.  all of the above
{: #fs-id2152426 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1079404" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id1142988}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1120051" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1076484">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1285066" markdown="1">
Compare and contrast the anatomical relationship of the anterior and
posterior lobes of the pituitary gland to the hypothalamus.
{: #fs-id1541276}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2861243" data-label="" markdown="1">
The anterior lobe of the pituitary gland is connected to the
hypothalamus by vasculature, which allows regulating hormones from the
hypothalamus to travel to the anterior pituitary. In contrast, the
posterior lobe is connected to the hypothalamus by a bridge of nerve
axons called the hypothalamic–hypophyseal tract, along which the
hypothalamus sends hormones produced by hypothalamic nerve cell bodies
to the posterior pituitary for storage and release into the circulation.
{: #fs-id1299241}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2212370">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1063483" markdown="1">
Name the target tissues for prolactin.
{: #fs-id669287}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1497377" data-label="" markdown="1">
The mammary glands are the target tissues for prolactin.
{: #fs-id1514710}

</div>
</div>
</section>




[1]: http://openstaxcollege.org/l/roleofhypo

