---
title: Hormones
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Identify the three major classes of hormones on the basis of chemical
  structure
* Compare and contrast intracellular and cell membrane hormone receptors
* Describe signaling pathways that involve cAMP and IP3
* Identify several factors that influence a target cell’s response
* Discuss the role of feedback loops and humoral, hormonal, and neural
  stimuli in hormone control

</div>
Although a given hormone may travel throughout the body in the
bloodstream, it will affect the activity only of its target cells; that
is, cells with receptors for that particular hormone. Once the hormone
binds to the receptor, a chain of events is initiated that leads to the
target cell’s response. Hormones play a critical role in the regulation
of physiological processes because of the target cell responses they
regulate. These responses contribute to human reproduction, growth and
development of body tissues, metabolism, fluid, and electrolyte balance,
sleep, and many other body functions. The major hormones of the human
body and their effects are identified in [\[link\]](#tbl-ch18_02){:
.autogenerated-content}.
{: #fs-id886859}

<table id="tbl-ch18_02" summary=""><thead> <tr> <th colspan="4">Endocrine Glands and Their Major Hormones</th> </tr> <tr> <th>Endocrine gland</th> <th>Associated hormones</th> <th>Chemical class</th> <th>Effect</th> </tr> </thead><tbody> <tr><td>Pituitary (anterior)</td> <td>Growth hormone (GH)</td> <td>Protein</td> <td>Promotes growth of body tissues</td></tr> <tr> <td>Pituitary (anterior)</td> <td>Prolactin (PRL)</td> <td>Peptide</td> <td>Promotes milk production</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Pituitary (anterior)</td> <td>Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)</td> <td>Glycoprotein</td> <td>Stimulates thyroid hormone release</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Pituitary (anterior)</td> <td>Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)</td> <td>Peptide</td> <td>Stimulates hormone release by adrenal cortex</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Pituitary (anterior)</td> <td>Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)</td> <td>Glycoprotein</td> <td>Stimulates gamete production</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Pituitary (anterior)</td> <td>Luteinizing hormone (LH)</td> <td>Glycoprotein</td> <td>Stimulates androgen production by gonads</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Pituitary (posterior)</td> <td>Antidiuretic hormone (ADH)</td> <td>Peptide</td> <td>Stimulates water reabsorption by kidneys</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Pituitary (posterior)</td> <td>Oxytocin</td> <td>Peptide</td> <td>Stimulates uterine contractions during childbirth</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Thyroid</td> <td>Thyroxine (T<sub>4</sub>), triiodothyronine (T<sub>3</sub>)</td> <td>Amine</td> <td>Stimulate basal metabolic rate</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Thyroid</td> <td>Calcitonin</td> <td>Peptide</td> <td>Reduces blood Ca<sup>2+</sup> levels</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Parathyroid</td> <td>Parathyroid hormone (PTH)</td> <td>Peptide</td> <td>Increases blood Ca<sup>2+ </sup>levels</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Adrenal (cortex)</td> <td>Aldosterone</td> <td>Steroid</td> <td>Increases blood Na<sup>+</sup> levels</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Adrenal (cortex)</td> <td>Cortisol, corticosterone, cortisone</td> <td>Steroid</td> <td>Increase blood glucose levels</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Adrenal (medulla)</td> <td>Epinephrine, norepinephrine</td> <td>Amine</td> <td>Stimulate fight-or-flight response</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Pineal</td> <td>Melatonin</td> <td>Amine</td> <td>Regulates sleep cycles</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Pancreas</td> <td>Insulin</td> <td>Protein</td> <td>Reduces blood glucose levels</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Pancreas</td> <td>Glucagon</td> <td>Protein</td> <td>Increases blood glucose levels</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Testes</td> <td>Testosterone</td> <td>Steroid</td> <td>Stimulates development of male secondary sex characteristics and sperm production</td> </tr> <tr> <td>Ovaries</td> <td>Estrogens and progesterone</td> <td>Steroid</td> <td>Stimulate development of female secondary sex characteristics and prepare the body for childbirth</td> </tr> </tbody></table>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1491567" markdown="1">
# Types of Hormones
{: data-type="title"}

The hormones of the human body can be divided into two major groups on
the basis of their chemical structure. Hormones derived from amino acids
include amines, peptides, and proteins. Those derived from lipids
include steroids ([\[link\]](#fig-ch18_02_01){:
.autogenerated-content}). These chemical groups affect a hormone’s
distribution, the type of receptors it binds to, and other aspects of
its function.
{: #fs-id1205727}

<figure id="fig-ch18_02_01">
<div data-type="title">
Amine, Peptide, Protein, and Steroid Hormone Structure
</div>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1739789" data-alt="This table shows the
chemical structure of amine hormones, peptide hormones, protein
hormones, and steroid hormones. Amine hormones are amino acids with
modified side groups. The example given is norepinephrine, which
contains the NH two group typical of an amino acid, along with a
hydroxyl (OH) group. The carboxyl group typical of most amino acids is
replaced with a benzene ring, depicted as a hexagon of carbons that are
connected by alternating single and double bonds. Peptide hormones are
composed of short chains of amino acids. The example given is oxytocin,
which has a chain of the following amino acids: GLY, LEU, PRO. The PRO
is the bottom of the chain, which connects to a ring of the following
amino acids: CYS, CYS, TYR, ILE, GLU, and ASP. Protein hormones are
composed of long chains of linked amino acids. The example given is
human growth hormone, which is composed of a bundle of amino acid
strands, some thread-like, some coiled, and some in flat, folded sheets.
Finally, steroid hormones are derived from the lipid cholesterol.
Testosterone and progesterone are given as examples, which each contain
several hexagonal and pentagonal carbon rings linked together."> ![This
table shows the chemical structure of amine hormones, peptide hormones,
protein hormones, and steroid hormones. Amine hormones are amino acids
with modified side groups. The example given is norepinephrine, which
contains the NH two group typical of an amino acid, along with a
hydroxyl (OH) group. The carboxyl group typical of most amino acids is
replaced with a benzene ring, depicted as a hexagon of carbons that are
connected by alternating single and double bonds. Peptide hormones are
composed of short chains of amino acids. The example given is oxytocin,
which has a chain of the following amino acids: GLY, LEU, PRO. The PRO
is the bottom of the chain, which connects to a ring of the following
amino acids: CYS, CYS, TYR, ILE, GLU, and ASP. Protein hormones are
composed of long chains of linked amino acids. The example given is
human growth hormone, which is composed of a bundle of amino acid
strands, some thread-like, some coiled, and some in flat, folded sheets.
Finally, steroid hormones are derived from the lipid cholesterol.
Testosterone and progesterone are given as examples, which each contain
several hexagonal and pentagonal carbon rings linked
together.](../resources/1802_Examples_of_Amine_Peptide_Protein_and_Steroid_Hormone_Structure.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="550"} </span>
</figure>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1107643" markdown="1">
## Amine Hormones
{: data-type="title"}

Hormones derived from the modification of amino acids are referred to as
amine hormones. Typically, the original structure of the amino acid is
modified such that a –COOH, or carboxyl, group is removed, whereas the
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" display=""> <mrow>
<mo>−</mo><msubsup> <mrow> <mtext>NH</mtext> </mrow> <mn>3</mn>
<mo>+</mo> </msubsup> </mrow> </math>

, or amine, group remains.
{: #fs-id1259347}

Amine hormones are synthesized from the amino acids tryptophan or
tyrosine. An example of a hormone derived from tryptophan is melatonin,
which is secreted by the pineal gland and helps regulate circadian
rhythm. Tyrosine derivatives include the metabolism-regulating thyroid
hormones, as well as the catecholamines, such as epinephrine,
norepinephrine, and dopamine. Epinephrine and norepinephrine are
secreted by the adrenal medulla and play a role in the fight-or-flight
response, whereas dopamine is secreted by the hypothalamus and inhibits
the release of certain anterior pituitary hormones.
{: #fs-id1509674}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1830067" markdown="1">
## Peptide and Protein Hormones
{: data-type="title"}

Whereas the amine hormones are derived from a single amino acid, peptide
and protein hormones consist of multiple amino acids that link to form
an amino acid chain. Peptide hormones consist of short chains of amino
acids, whereas protein hormones are longer polypeptides. Both types are
synthesized like other body proteins: DNA is transcribed into mRNA,
which is translated into an amino acid chain.
{: #fs-id1532009}

Examples of peptide hormones include antidiuretic hormone (ADH), a
pituitary hormone important in fluid balance, and atrial-natriuretic
peptide, which is produced by the heart and helps to decrease blood
pressure. Some examples of protein hormones include growth hormone,
which is produced by the pituitary gland, and follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH), which has an attached carbohydrate group and is thus
classified as a glycoprotein. FSH helps stimulate the maturation of eggs
in the ovaries and sperm in the testes.
{: #fs-id1863392}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1242470" markdown="1">
## Steroid Hormones
{: data-type="title"}

The primary hormones derived from lipids are steroids. Steroid hormones
are derived from the lipid cholesterol. For example, the reproductive
hormones testosterone and the estrogens—which are produced by the gonads
(testes and ovaries)—are steroid hormones. The adrenal glands produce
the steroid hormone aldosterone, which is involved in osmoregulation,
and cortisol, which plays a role in metabolism.
{: #fs-id1569493}

Like cholesterol, steroid hormones are not soluble in water (they are
hydrophobic). Because blood is water-based, lipid-derived hormones must
travel to their target cell bound to a transport protein. This more
complex structure extends the half-life of steroid hormones much longer
than that of hormones derived from amino acids. A hormone’s half-life is
the time required for half the concentration of the hormone to be
degraded. For example, the lipid-derived hormone cortisol has a
half-life of approximately 60 to 90 minutes. In contrast, the amino
acid–derived hormone epinephrine has a half-life of approximately one
minute.
{: #fs-id1515603}

</section>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1212812" markdown="1">
# Pathways of Hormone Action
{: data-type="title"}

The message a hormone sends is received by a <span
data-type="term">hormone receptor</span>, a protein located either
inside the cell or within the cell membrane. The receptor will process
the message by initiating other signaling events or cellular mechanisms
that result in the target cell’s response. Hormone receptors recognize
molecules with specific shapes and side groups, and respond only to
those hormones that are recognized. The same type of receptor may be
located on cells in different body tissues, and trigger somewhat
different responses. Thus, the response triggered by a hormone depends
not only on the hormone, but also on the target cell.
{: #fs-id1500079}

Once the target cell receives the hormone signal, it can respond in a
variety of ways. The response may include the stimulation of protein
synthesis, activation or deactivation of enzymes, alteration in the
permeability of the cell membrane, altered rates of mitosis and cell
growth, and stimulation of the secretion of products. Moreover, a single
hormone may be capable of inducing different responses in a given cell.
{: #fs-id1053236}

<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id767938" markdown="1">
## Pathways Involving Intracellular Hormone Receptors
{: data-type="title"}

Intracellular hormone receptors are located inside the cell. Hormones
that bind to this type of receptor must be able to cross the cell
membrane. Steroid hormones are derived from cholesterol and therefore
can readily diffuse through the lipid bilayer of the cell membrane to
reach the intracellular receptor ([\[link\]](#fig-ch18_02_02){:
.autogenerated-content}). Thyroid hormones, which contain benzene rings
studded with iodine, are also lipid-soluble and can enter the cell.
{: #fs-id1885599}

The location of steroid and thyroid hormone binding differs slightly: a
steroid hormone may bind to its receptor within the cytosol or within
the nucleus. In either case, this binding generates a hormone-receptor
complex that moves toward the chromatin in the cell nucleus and binds to
a particular segment of the cell’s DNA. In contrast, thyroid hormones
bind to receptors already bound to DNA. For both steroid and thyroid
hormones, binding of the hormone-receptor complex with DNA triggers
transcription of a target gene to mRNA, which moves to the cytosol and
directs protein synthesis by ribosomes.
{: #fs-id1524427}

<figure id="fig-ch18_02_02">
<div data-type="title">
Binding of Lipid-Soluble Hormones
</div>
<figcaption>
A steroid hormone directly initiates the production of proteins within a
target cell. Steroid hormones easily diffuse through the cell membrane.
The hormone binds to its receptor in the cytosol, forming a
receptor–hormone complex. The receptor–hormone complex then enters the
nucleus and binds to the target gene on the DNA. Transcription of the
gene creates a messenger RNA that is translated into the desired protein
within the cytoplasm.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2817748" data-alt="This illustration
shows the steps involved with the binding of lipid-soluble hormones.
Lipid-soluble hormones, such as steroid hormones, easily diffuse through
the cell membrane. The hormone binds to its receptor in the cytosol,
forming a receptor-hormone complex. The receptor-hormone complex then
enters the nucleus and binds to the target gene on the cell&#x2019;s
DNA. Transcription of the gene creates a messenger RNA that is
translated into the desired protein within the cytoplasm. It is these
proteins that alter the cell&#x2019;s activity."> ![This illustration
shows the steps involved with the binding of lipid-soluble hormones.
Lipid-soluble hormones, such as steroid hormones, easily diffuse through
the cell membrane. The hormone binds to its receptor in the cytosol,
forming a receptor-hormone complex. The receptor-hormone complex then
enters the nucleus and binds to the target gene on the cell&#x2019;s
DNA. Transcription of the gene creates a messenger RNA that is
translated into the desired protein within the cytoplasm. It is these
proteins that alter the cell&#x2019;s
activity.](../resources/1803_Binding_of_Lipid-Soluble_Hormones.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="480"} </span>
</figure>
</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1174906" markdown="1">
## Pathways Involving Cell Membrane Hormone Receptors
{: data-type="title"}

Hydrophilic, or water-soluble, hormones are unable to diffuse through
the lipid bilayer of the cell membrane and must therefore pass on their
message to a receptor located at the surface of the cell. Except for
thyroid hormones, which are lipid-soluble, all amino acid–derived
hormones bind to cell membrane receptors that are located, at least in
part, on the extracellular surface of the cell membrane. Therefore, they
do not directly affect the transcription of target genes, but instead
initiate a signaling cascade that is carried out by a molecule called a
<span data-type="term">second messenger</span>. In this case, the
hormone is called a <span data-type="term">first messenger</span>.
{: #fs-id1211750}

The second messenger used by most hormones is <span
data-type="term">cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)</span>. In the
cAMP second messenger system, a water-soluble hormone binds to its
receptor in the cell membrane (Step 1 in [\[link\]](#fig-ch18_02_03){:
.autogenerated-content}). This receptor is associated with an
intracellular component called a <span data-type="term">G
protein</span>, and binding of the hormone activates the G-protein
component (Step 2). The activated G protein in turn activates an enzyme
called <span data-type="term">adenylyl cyclase</span>, also known as
adenylate cyclase (Step 3), which converts adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
to cAMP (Step 4). As the second messenger, cAMP activates a type of
enzyme called a <span data-type="term">protein kinase</span> that is
present in the cytosol (Step 5). Activated protein kinases initiate a
<span data-type="term">phosphorylation cascade</span>, in which multiple
protein kinases phosphorylate (add a phosphate group to) numerous and
various cellular proteins, including other enzymes (Step 6).
{: #fs-id1121215}

<figure id="fig-ch18_02_03">
<div data-type="title">
Binding of Water-Soluble Hormones
</div>
<figcaption>
Water-soluble hormones cannot diffuse through the cell membrane. These
hormones must bind to a surface cell-membrane receptor. The receptor
then initiates a cell-signaling pathway within the cell involving G
proteins, adenylyl cyclase, the secondary messenger cyclic AMP (cAMP),
and protein kinases. In the final step, these protein kinases
phosphorylate proteins in the cytoplasm. This activates proteins in the
cell that carry out the changes specified by the hormone.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1145612" data-alt="This illustration
shows the binding of water-soluble hormones. Water-soluble hormones
cannot diffuse through the cell membrane. These hormones must bind to a
receptor on the outer surface of the cell membrane. The receptor then
activates a G protein in the cytoplasm, which travels to and activates
adenylyl cyclase. Adenylyl cyclase catalyzes the conversion of ATP to
CAMP, the secondary messenger in this pathway. CAMP, in turn, activates
protein kinases, which phosphorylate proteins in the cytoplasm. This
phosphorylation, shown as a P being added to a polypeptide chain,
activates the proteins, allowing them to alter cell activity."> ![This
illustration shows the binding of water-soluble hormones. Water-soluble
hormones cannot diffuse through the cell membrane. These hormones must
bind to a receptor on the outer surface of the cell membrane. The
receptor then activates a G protein in the cytoplasm, which travels to
and activates adenylyl cyclase. Adenylyl cyclase catalyzes the
conversion of ATP to CAMP, the secondary messenger in this pathway.
CAMP, in turn, activates protein kinases, which phosphorylate proteins
in the cytoplasm. This phosphorylation, shown as a P being added to a
polypeptide chain, activates the proteins, allowing them to alter cell
activity.](../resources/1804_Binding_of_Water-Soluble_Hormones.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="480"} </span>
</figure>
The phosphorylation of cellular proteins can trigger a wide variety of
effects, from nutrient metabolism to the synthesis of different hormones
and other products. The effects vary according to the type of target
cell, the G proteins and kinases involved, and the phosphorylation of
proteins. Examples of hormones that use cAMP as a second messenger
include calcitonin, which is important for bone construction and
regulating blood calcium levels; glucagon, which plays a role in blood
glucose levels; and thyroid-stimulating hormone, which causes the
release of T<sub>3</sub> and T<sub>4</sub> from the thyroid gland.
{: #fs-id1179935}

Overall, the phosphorylation cascade significantly increases the
efficiency, speed, and specificity of the hormonal response, as
thousands of signaling events can be initiated simultaneously in
response to a very low concentration of hormone in the bloodstream.
However, the duration of the hormone signal is short, as cAMP is quickly
deactivated by the enzyme <span data-type="term">phosphodiesterase
(PDE)</span>, which is located in the cytosol. The action of PDE helps
to ensure that a target cell’s response ceases quickly unless new
hormones arrive at the cell membrane.
{: #fs-id1475912}

Importantly, there are also G proteins that decrease the levels of cAMP
in the cell in response to hormone binding. For example, when growth
hormone–inhibiting hormone (GHIH), also known as somatostatin, binds to
its receptors in the pituitary gland, the level of cAMP decreases,
thereby inhibiting the secretion of human growth hormone.
{: #fs-id1493578}

Not all water-soluble hormones initiate the cAMP second messenger
system. One common alternative system uses calcium ions as a second
messenger. In this system, G proteins activate the enzyme phospholipase
C (PLC), which functions similarly to adenylyl cyclase. Once activated,
PLC cleaves a membrane-bound phospholipid into two molecules: <span
data-type="term">diacylglycerol (DAG)</span> and <span
data-type="term">inositol triphosphate (IP<sub>3</sub>)</span>. Like
cAMP, DAG activates protein kinases that initiate a phosphorylation
cascade. At the same time, IP<sub>3</sub> causes calcium ions to be
released from storage sites within the cytosol, such as from within the
smooth endoplasmic reticulum. The calcium ions then act as second
messengers in two ways: they can influence enzymatic and other cellular
activities directly, or they can bind to calcium-binding proteins, the
most common of which is calmodulin. Upon binding calcium, calmodulin is
able to modulate protein kinase within the cell. Examples of hormones
that use calcium ions as a second messenger system include angiotensin
II, which helps regulate blood pressure through vasoconstriction, and
growth hormone–releasing hormone (GHRH), which causes the pituitary
gland to release growth hormones.
{: #fs-id912818}

</section>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1110189" markdown="1">
# Factors Affecting Target Cell Response
{: data-type="title"}

You will recall that target cells must have receptors specific to a
given hormone if that hormone is to trigger a response. But several
other factors influence the target cell response. For example, the
presence of a significant level of a hormone circulating in the
bloodstream can cause its target cells to decrease their number of
receptors for that hormone. This process is called <span
data-type="term">downregulation</span>, and it allows cells to become
less reactive to the excessive hormone levels. When the level of a
hormone is chronically reduced, target cells engage in <span
data-type="term">upregulation</span> to increase their number of
receptors. This process allows cells to be more sensitive to the hormone
that is present. Cells can also alter the sensitivity of the receptors
themselves to various hormones.
{: #fs-id1531254}

Two or more hormones can interact to affect the response of cells in a
variety of ways. The three most common types of interaction are as
follows:
{: #fs-id891214}

* The permissive effect, in which the presence of one hormone enables
  another hormone to act. For example, thyroid hormones have complex
  permissive relationships with certain reproductive hormones. A dietary
  deficiency of iodine, a component of thyroid hormones, can therefore
  affect reproductive system development and functioning.
* The synergistic effect, in which two hormones with similar effects
  produce an amplified response. In some cases, two hormones are
  required for an adequate response. For example, two different
  reproductive hormones—FSH from the pituitary gland and estrogens from
  the ovaries—are required for the maturation of female ova (egg cells).
* The antagonistic effect, in which two hormones have opposing effects.
  A familiar example is the effect of two pancreatic hormones, insulin
  and glucagon. Insulin increases the liver’s storage of glucose as
  glycogen, decreasing blood glucose, whereas glucagon stimulates the
  breakdown of glycogen stores, increasing blood glucose.
{: #fs-id1521639}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2119959" markdown="1">
# Regulation of Hormone Secretion
{: data-type="title"}

To prevent abnormal hormone levels and a potential disease state,
hormone levels must be tightly controlled. The body maintains this
control by balancing hormone production and degradation. Feedback loops
govern the initiation and maintenance of most hormone secretion in
response to various stimuli.
{: #fs-id1534548}

<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1836686" markdown="1">
## Role of Feedback Loops
{: data-type="title"}

The contribution of feedback loops to homeostasis will only be briefly
reviewed here. Positive feedback loops are characterized by the release
of additional hormone in response to an original hormone release. The
release of oxytocin during childbirth is a positive feedback loop. The
initial release of oxytocin begins to signal the uterine muscles to
contract, which pushes the fetus toward the cervix, causing it to
stretch. This, in turn, signals the pituitary gland to release more
oxytocin, causing labor contractions to intensify. The release of
oxytocin decreases after the birth of the child.
{: #fs-id669317}

The more common method of hormone regulation is the negative feedback
loop. Negative feedback is characterized by the inhibition of further
secretion of a hormone in response to adequate levels of that hormone.
This allows blood levels of the hormone to be regulated within a narrow
range. An example of a negative feedback loop is the release of
glucocorticoid hormones from the adrenal glands, as directed by the
hypothalamus and pituitary gland. As glucocorticoid concentrations in
the blood rise, the hypothalamus and pituitary gland reduce their
signaling to the adrenal glands to prevent additional glucocorticoid
secretion ([\[link\]](#fig-ch18_02_04){: .autogenerated-content}).
{: #fs-id1036626}

<figure id="fig-ch18_02_04">
<div data-type="title">
Negative Feedback Loop
</div>
<figcaption>
The release of adrenal glucocorticoids is stimulated by the release of
hormones from the hypothalamus and pituitary gland. This signaling is
inhibited when glucocorticoid levels become elevated by causing negative
signals to the pituitary gland and hypothalamus.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1570037" data-alt="This diagram shows a
negative feedback loop using the example of glucocorticoid regulation in
the blood. Step 1 in the cycle is when an imbalance occurs. The
hypothalamus perceives low blood concentrations of glucocorticoids in
the blood. This is illustrated by there being only 5 glucocorticoids
floating in a cross section of an artery. Step 2 in the cycle is hormone
release, where the hypothalamus releases corticotropin-releasing hormone
(CRH). Step 3 is labeled correction. Here, the CRH release starts a
hormone cascade that triggers the adrenal gland to release
glucocorticoid into the blood. This allows the blood concentration of
glucocorticoid to increase, as illustrated by 8 glucocorticoid molecules
now being present in the cross section of the artery. Step 4 is labeled
negative feedback. Here, the hypothalamus perceives normal
concentrations of glucocorticoids in the blood and stops releasing CRH.
This brings blood glucocorticoid levels back to homeostasis."> ![This
diagram shows a negative feedback loop using the example of
glucocorticoid regulation in the blood. Step 1 in the cycle is when an
imbalance occurs. The hypothalamus perceives low blood concentrations of
glucocorticoids in the blood. This is illustrated by there being only 5
glucocorticoids floating in a cross section of an artery. Step 2 in the
cycle is hormone release, where the hypothalamus releases
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH). Step 3 is labeled correction.
Here, the CRH release starts a hormone cascade that triggers the adrenal
gland to release glucocorticoid into the blood. This allows the blood
concentration of glucocorticoid to increase, as illustrated by 8
glucocorticoid molecules now being present in the cross section of the
artery. Step 4 is labeled negative feedback. Here, the hypothalamus
perceives normal concentrations of glucocorticoids in the blood and
stops releasing CRH. This brings blood glucocorticoid levels back to
homeostasis.](../resources/1805_Negative_Feedback_Loop.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="520"} </span>
</figure>
</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="fs-id1501758" markdown="1">
## Role of Endocrine Gland Stimuli
{: data-type="title"}

Reflexes triggered by both chemical and neural stimuli control endocrine
activity. These reflexes may be simple, involving only one hormone
response, or they may be more complex and involve many hormones, as is
the case with the hypothalamic control of various anterior
pituitary–controlled hormones.
{: #fs-id1141690}

Humoral stimuli are changes in blood levels of non-hormone chemicals,
such as nutrients or ions, which cause the release or inhibition of a
hormone to, in turn, maintain homeostasis. For example, osmoreceptors in
the hypothalamus detect changes in blood osmolarity (the concentration
of solutes in the blood plasma). If blood osmolarity is too high,
meaning that the blood is not dilute enough, osmoreceptors signal the
hypothalamus to release ADH. The hormone causes the kidneys to reabsorb
more water and reduce the volume of urine produced. This reabsorption
causes a reduction of the osmolarity of the blood, diluting the blood to
the appropriate level. The regulation of blood glucose is another
example. High blood glucose levels cause the release of insulin from the
pancreas, which increases glucose uptake by cells and liver storage of
glucose as glycogen.
{: #fs-id1739096}

An endocrine gland may also secrete a hormone in response to the
presence of another hormone produced by a different endocrine gland.
Such hormonal stimuli often involve the hypothalamus, which produces
releasing and inhibiting hormones that control the secretion of a
variety of pituitary hormones.
{: #fs-id1863415}

In addition to these chemical signals, hormones can also be released in
response to neural stimuli. A common example of neural stimuli is the
activation of the fight-or-flight response by the sympathetic nervous
system. When an individual perceives danger, sympathetic neurons signal
the adrenal glands to secrete norepinephrine and epinephrine. The two
hormones dilate blood vessels, increase the heart and respiratory rate,
and suppress the digestive and immune systems. These responses boost the
body’s transport of oxygen to the brain and muscles, thereby improving
the body’s ability to fight or flee.
{: #fs-id1183709}

<div data-type="note" id="fs-id1475642" class="anatomy everyday" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Everyday Connections
</div>
<span data-type="title">Bisphenol A and Endocrine Disruption</span> You
may have heard news reports about the effects of a chemical called
bisphenol A (BPA) in various types of food packaging. BPA is used in the
manufacturing of hard plastics and epoxy resins. Common food-related
items that may contain BPA include the lining of aluminum cans, plastic
food-storage containers, drinking cups, as well as baby bottles and
“sippy” cups. Other uses of BPA include medical equipment, dental
fillings, and the lining of water pipes.
{: #fs-id1595483}

Research suggests that BPA is an endocrine disruptor, meaning that it
negatively interferes with the endocrine system, particularly during the
prenatal and postnatal development period. In particular, BPA mimics the
hormonal effects of estrogens and has the opposite effect—that of
androgens. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) notes in their
statement about BPA safety that although traditional toxicology studies
have supported the safety of low levels of exposure to BPA, recent
studies using novel approaches to test for subtle effects have led to
some concern about the potential effects of BPA on the brain, behavior,
and prostate gland in fetuses, infants, and young children. The FDA is
currently facilitating decreased use of BPA in food-related materials.
Many US companies have voluntarily removed BPA from baby bottles,
“sippy” cups, and the linings of infant formula cans, and most plastic
reusable water bottles sold today boast that they are “BPA free.” In
contrast, both Canada and the European Union have completely banned the
use of BPA in baby products.
{: #fs-id1092374}

The potential harmful effects of BPA have been studied in both animal
models and humans and include a large variety of health effects, such as
developmental delay and disease. For example, prenatal exposure to BPA
during the first trimester of human pregnancy may be associated with
wheezing and aggressive behavior during childhood. Adults exposed to
high levels of BPA may experience altered thyroid signaling and male
sexual dysfunction. BPA exposure during the prenatal or postnatal period
of development in animal models has been observed to cause neurological
delays, changes in brain structure and function, sexual dysfunction,
asthma, and increased risk for multiple cancers. In vitro studies have
also shown that BPA exposure causes molecular changes that initiate the
development of cancers of the breast, prostate, and brain. Although
these studies have implicated BPA in numerous ill health effects, some
experts caution that some of these studies may be flawed and that more
research needs to be done. In the meantime, the FDA recommends that
consumers take precautions to limit their exposure to BPA. In addition
to purchasing foods in packaging free of BPA, consumers should avoid
carrying or storing foods or liquids in bottles with the recycling code
3 or 7. Foods and liquids should not be microwave-heated in any form of
plastic: use paper, glass, or ceramics instead.
{: #fs-id1085828}

</div>
</section>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1490457" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

Hormones are derived from amino acids or lipids. Amine hormones
originate from the amino acids tryptophan or tyrosine. Larger amino acid
hormones include peptides and protein hormones. Steroid hormones are
derived from cholesterol.
{: #fs-id1282269}

Steroid hormones and thyroid hormone are lipid soluble. All other amino
acid–derived hormones are water soluble. Hydrophobic hormones are able
to diffuse through the membrane and interact with an intracellular
receptor. In contrast, hydrophilic hormones must interact with cell
membrane receptors. These are typically associated with a G protein,
which becomes activated when the hormone binds the receptor. This
initiates a signaling cascade that involves a second messenger, such as
cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). Second messenger systems greatly
amplify the hormone signal, creating a broader, more efficient, and
faster response.
{: #fs-id1432161}

Hormones are released upon stimulation that is of either chemical or
neural origin. Regulation of hormone release is primarily achieved
through negative feedback. Various stimuli may cause the release of
hormones, but there are three major types. Humoral stimuli are changes
in ion or nutrient levels in the blood. Hormonal stimuli are changes in
hormone levels that initiate or inhibit the secretion of another
hormone. Finally, a neural stimulus occurs when a nerve impulse prompts
the secretion or inhibition of a hormone.
{: #fs-id1273482}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1865047" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id805158">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1085996" markdown="1">
A newly developed pesticide has been observed to bind to an
intracellular hormone receptor. If ingested, residue from this pesticide
could disrupt levels of ________.
{: #fs-id1188533}

1.  melatonin
2.  thyroid hormone
3.  growth hormone
4.  insulin
{: #fs-id1056908 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1150311" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id1471472}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1486055">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1494655" markdown="1">
A small molecule binds to a G protein, preventing its activation. What
direct effect will this have on signaling that involves cAMP?
{: #fs-id1863594}

1.  The hormone will not be able to bind to the hormone receptor.
2.  Adenylyl cyclase will not be activated.
3.  Excessive quantities of cAMP will be produced.
4.  The phosphorylation cascade will be initiated.
{: #fs-id1146438 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1121871" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id1514710}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1173979">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1448707" markdown="1">
A student is in a car accident, and although not hurt, immediately
experiences pupil dilation, increased heart rate, and rapid breathing.
What type of endocrine system stimulus did the student receive?
{: #fs-id1490290}

1.  humoral
2.  hormonal
3.  neural
4.  positive feedback
{: #fs-id1532957 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1283262" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id1966965}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1163314" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1828664">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1229539" markdown="1">
Compare and contrast the signaling events involved with the second
messengers cAMP and IP<sub>3</sub>.
{: #fs-id1859379}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1485631" data-label="" markdown="1">
In both cAMP and IP<sub>3</sub>–calcium signaling, a hormone binds to a
cell membrane hormone receptor that is coupled to a G protein. The G
protein becomes activated when the hormone binds. In the case of cAMP
signaling, the activated G protein activates adenylyl cyclase, which
causes ATP to be converted to cAMP. This second messenger can then
initiate other signaling events, such as a phosphorylation cascade. In
the case of IP<sub>3</sub>–calcium signaling, the activated G protein
activates phospholipase C, which cleaves a membrane phospholipid
compound into DAG and IP<sub>3</sub>. IP<sub>3</sub> causes the release
of calcium, another second messenger, from intracellular stores. This
causes further signaling events.
{: #fs-id1530695}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1056144">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1102656" markdown="1">
Describe the mechanism of hormone response resulting from the binding of
a hormone with an intracellular receptor.
{: #fs-id773679}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id723536" data-label="" markdown="1">
An intracellular hormone receptor is located within the cell. A
hydrophobic hormone diffuses through the cell membrane and binds to the
intracellular hormone receptor, which may be in the cytosol or in the
cell nucleus. This hormone–receptor complex binds to a segment of DNA.
This initiates the transcription of a target gene, the end result of
which is protein assembly and the hormonal response.
{: #fs-id1476034}

</div>
</div>
</section>



