---
title: Blood Typing
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

* Describe the two basic physiological consequences of transfusion of
  incompatible blood
* Compare and contrast ABO and Rh blood groups
* Identify which blood groups may be safely transfused into patients
  with different ABO types
* Discuss the pathophysiology of hemolytic disease of the newborn

</div>
Blood transfusions in humans were risky procedures until the discovery
of the major human blood groups by Karl Landsteiner, an Austrian
biologist and physician, in 1900. Until that point, physicians did not
understand that death sometimes followed blood transfusions, when the
type of donor blood infused into the patient was incompatible with the
patient’s own blood. Blood groups are determined by the presence or
absence of specific marker molecules on the plasma membranes of
erythrocytes. With their discovery, it became possible for the first
time to match patient-donor blood types and prevent transfusion
reactions and deaths.
{: #fs-id2316252}

<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2382783" markdown="1">
# Antigens, Antibodies, and Transfusion Reactions
{: data-type="title"}

Antigens are substances that the body does not recognize as belonging to
the “self” and that therefore trigger a defensive response from the
leukocytes of the immune system. (Seek more content for additional
information on immunity.) Here, we will focus on the role of immunity in
blood transfusion reactions. With RBCs in particular, you may see the
antigens referred to as isoantigens or agglutinogens (surface antigens)
and the antibodies referred to as isoantibodies or agglutinins. In this
chapter, we will use the more common terms antigens and antibodies.
{: #fs-id2715080}

Antigens are generally large proteins, but may include other classes of
organic molecules, including carbohydrates, lipids, and nucleic acids.
Following an infusion of incompatible blood, erythrocytes with foreign
antigens appear in the bloodstream and trigger an immune response.
Proteins called antibodies (immunoglobulins), which are produced by
certain B lymphocytes called plasma cells, attach to the antigens on the
plasma membranes of the infused erythrocytes and cause them to adhere to
one another.
{: #fs-id1952985}

* Because the arms of the Y-shaped antibodies attach randomly to more
  than one nonself erythrocyte surface, they form clumps of
  erythrocytes. This process is called <span
  data-type="term">agglutination</span>.
* The clumps of erythrocytes block small blood vessels throughout the
  body, depriving tissues of oxygen and nutrients.
* As the erythrocyte clumps are degraded, in a process called <span
  data-type="term">hemolysis</span>, their hemoglobin is released into
  the bloodstream. This hemoglobin travels to the kidneys, which are
  responsible for filtration of the blood. However, the load of
  hemoglobin released can easily overwhelm the kidney’s capacity to
  clear it, and the patient can quickly develop kidney failure.
{: #fs-id2396137}

More than 50 antigens have been identified on erythrocyte membranes, but
the most significant in terms of their potential harm to patients are
classified in two groups: the ABO blood group and the Rh blood group.
{: #fs-id2653848}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2111265" markdown="1">
# The ABO Blood Group
{: data-type="title"}

Although the <span data-type="term">ABO blood group</span> name consists
of three letters, ABO blood typing designates the presence or absence of
just two antigens, A and B. Both are glycoproteins. People whose
erythrocytes have A antigens on their erythrocyte membrane surfaces are
designated blood type A, and those whose erythrocytes have B antigens
are blood type B. People can also have both A and B antigens on their
erythrocytes, in which case they are blood type AB. People with neither
A nor B antigens are designated blood type O. ABO blood types are
genetically determined.
{: #fs-id2454712}

Normally the body must be exposed to a foreign antigen before an
antibody can be produced. This is not the case for the ABO blood group.
Individuals with type A blood—without any prior exposure to incompatible
blood—have preformed antibodies to the B antigen circulating in their
blood plasma. These antibodies, referred to as anti-B antibodies, will
cause agglutination and hemolysis if they ever encounter erythrocytes
with B antigens. Similarly, an individual with type B blood has
pre-formed anti-A antibodies. Individuals with type AB blood, which has
both antigens, do not have preformed antibodies to either of these.
People with type O blood lack antigens A and B on their erythrocytes,
but both anti-A and anti-B antibodies circulate in their blood plasma.
{: #fs-id2468186}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2344330" markdown="1">
# Rh Blood Groups
{: data-type="title"}

The <span data-type="term">Rh blood group</span> is classified according
to the presence or absence of a second erythrocyte antigen identified as
Rh. (It was first discovered in a type of primate known as a rhesus
macaque, which is often used in research, because its blood is similar
to that of humans.) Although dozens of Rh antigens have been identified,
only one, designated D, is clinically important. Those who have the Rh D
antigen present on their erythrocytes—about 85 percent of Americans—are
described as Rh positive (Rh<sup>+</sup>) and those who lack it are Rh
negative (Rh<sup>−</sup>). Note that the Rh group is distinct from the
ABO group, so any individual, no matter their ABO blood type, may have
or lack this Rh antigen. When identifying a patient’s blood type, the Rh
group is designated by adding the word positive or negative to the ABO
type. For example, A positive (A<sup>+</sup>) means ABO group A blood
with the Rh antigen present, and AB negative (AB<sup>−</sup>) means ABO
group AB blood without the Rh antigen.
{: #fs-id2492889}

[\[link\]](#tbl-ch19_02){: .autogenerated-content} summarizes the
distribution of the ABO and Rh blood types within the United States.
{: #eip-885}

<table id="tbl-ch19_02" summary=""><thead> <tr> <th colspan="5">Summary of ABO and Rh Blood Types within the United States </th> </tr> <tr> <th>Blood Type</th> <th>African-Americans</th> <th>Asian-Americans</th> <th>Caucasian-Americans</th> <th>Latino/Latina-Americans</th> </tr> </thead><tbody> <tr> <td>A<sup>+</sup></td> <td>24</td> <td>27</td> <td>33</td> <td>29</td> </tr> <tr> <td>A<sup>−</sup></td> <td>2</td> <td>0.5</td> <td>7</td> <td>2</td> </tr> <tr> <td>B<sup>+</sup></td> <td>18</td> <td>25</td> <td>9</td> <td>9</td> </tr> <tr> <td>B<sup>−</sup></td> <td>1</td> <td>0.4</td> <td>2</td> <td>1</td> </tr> <tr> <td>AB<sup>+</sup></td> <td>4</td> <td>7</td> <td>3</td> <td>2</td> </tr> <tr> <td>AB<sup>−</sup></td> <td>0.3</td> <td>0.1</td> <td>1</td> <td>0.2</td> </tr> <tr> <td>O<sup>+</sup></td> <td>47</td> <td>39</td> <td>37</td> <td>53</td> </tr> <tr> <td>O<sup>−</sup></td> <td>4</td> <td>1</td> <td>8</td> <td>4</td> </tr> </tbody></table>
In contrast to the ABO group antibodies, which are preformed, antibodies
to the Rh antigen are produced only in Rh<sup>−</sup> individuals after
exposure to the antigen. This process, called sensitization, occurs
following a transfusion with Rh-incompatible blood or, more commonly,
with the birth of an Rh<sup>+</sup> baby to an Rh<sup>−</sup> mother.
Problems are rare in a first pregnancy, since the baby’s Rh<sup>+</sup>
cells rarely cross the placenta (the organ of gas and nutrient exchange
between the baby and the mother). However, during or immediately after
birth, the Rh<sup>−</sup> mother can be exposed to the baby’s
Rh<sup>+</sup> cells ([\[link\]](#fig-ch19_06_01){:
.autogenerated-content}). Research has shown that this occurs in about
13−14 percent of such pregnancies. After exposure, the mother’s immune
system begins to generate anti-Rh antibodies. If the mother should then
conceive another Rh<sup>+</sup> baby, the Rh antibodies she has produced
can cross the placenta into the fetal bloodstream and destroy the fetal
RBCs. This condition, known as <span data-type="term">hemolytic disease
of the newborn (HDN)</span> or erythroblastosis fetalis, may cause
anemia in mild cases, but the agglutination and hemolysis can be so
severe that without treatment the fetus may die in the womb or shortly
after birth.
{: #fs-id1899114}

<figure id="fig-ch19_06_01">
<div data-type="title">
Erythroblastosis Fetalis
</div>
<figcaption>
The first exposure of an Rh<sup>−</sup> mother to Rh<sup>+</sup>
erythrocytes during pregnancy induces sensitization. Anti-Rh antibodies
begin to circulate in the mother’s bloodstream. A second exposure occurs
with a subsequent pregnancy with an Rh<sup>+</sup> fetus in the uterus.
Maternal anti-Rh antibodies may cross the placenta and enter the fetal
bloodstream, causing agglutination and hemolysis of fetal erythrocytes.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2502299" data-alt="This figure shows an
umbilical artery and vein passing through the placenta on the top left.
The top right panel shows the first exposure to Rh+ antibodies in the
mother. The bottom right panel shows the response when the second
exposure in the form of another fetus takes place. Textboxes detail the
steps in each process."> ![This figure shows an umbilical artery and
vein passing through the placenta on the top left. The top right panel
shows the first exposure to Rh+ antibodies in the mother. The bottom
right panel shows the response when the second exposure in the form of
another fetus takes place. Textboxes detail the steps in each
process.](../resources/1910_Erythroblastosis_Fetalis.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="600"} </span>
</figure>
A drug known as RhoGAM, short for Rh immune globulin, can temporarily
prevent the development of Rh antibodies in the Rh<sup>−</sup> mother,
thereby averting this potentially serious disease for the fetus. RhoGAM
antibodies destroy any fetal Rh<sup>+</sup> erythrocytes that may cross
the placental barrier. RhoGAM is normally administered to Rh<sup>−</sup>
mothers during weeks 26−28 of pregnancy and within 72 hours following
birth. It has proven remarkably effective in decreasing the incidence of
HDN. Earlier we noted that the incidence of HDN in an Rh<sup>+</sup>
subsequent pregnancy to an Rh<sup>−</sup> mother is about 13–14 percent
without preventive treatment. Since the introduction of RhoGAM in 1968,
the incidence has dropped to about 0.1 percent in the United States.
{: #fs-id2822281}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2801178" markdown="1">
# ABO Cross Matching
{: data-type="title"}

Clinicians are able to determine a patient’s blood type quickly and
easily using commercially prepared antibodies. In this laboratory test,
called <span data-type="term">cross matching</span>, a sample of blood
of unknown type is placed into separate wells. Into one well a small
amount of anti-A antibody is added, and to another a small amount of
anti-B antibody. If the antigen is present, the antibodies will cause
visible agglutination of the cells ([\[link\]](#fig-ch19_06_02){:
.autogenerated-content}). The blood should also be tested for Rh
antibodies.
{: #fs-id2696923}

<figure id="fig-ch19_06_02">
<div data-type="title">
Cross Matching Blood Types
</div>
<figcaption>
This sample of a commercially produced “bedside” card enables quick
typing of both a recipient’s and donor’s blood before transfusion. The
card contains three reaction sites or wells. One is coated with an
anti-A antibody, one with an anti-B antibody, and one with an anti-D
antibody (tests for the presence of Rh factor D). Mixing a drop of blood
and saline into each well enables the blood to interact with a
preparation of type-specific antibodies, also called anti-seras.
Agglutination of RBCs in a given site indicates a positive
identification of the blood antigens, in this case A and Rh antigens for
blood type A<sup>+</sup>. For the purpose of transfusion, the donor’s
and recipient’s blood types must match.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2639973" data-alt="This figure shows
three different red blood cells with different blood types."> ![This
figure shows three different red blood cells with different blood
types.](../resources/1912_Cross_Matching_Blood_Types.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="430"} </span>
</figure>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1921655" markdown="1">
# ABO Transfusion Protocols
{: data-type="title"}

To avoid transfusion reactions, it is best to transfuse only matching
blood types; that is, a type B<sup>+</sup> recipient should ideally
receive blood only from a type B<sup>+</sup> donor and so on. That said,
in emergency situations, when acute hemorrhage threatens the patient’s
life, there may not be time for cross matching to identify blood type.
In these cases, blood from a <span data-type="term">universal
donor</span>—an individual with type O<sup>−</sup> blood—may be
transfused. Recall that type O erythrocytes do not display A or B
antigens. Thus, anti-A or anti-B antibodies that might be circulating in
the patient’s blood plasma will not encounter any erythrocyte surface
antigens on the donated blood and therefore will not be provoked into a
response. One problem with this designation of universal donor is if the
O<sup>−</sup> individual had prior exposure to Rh antigen, Rh antibodies
may be present in the donated blood. Also, introducing type O blood into
an individual with type A, B, or AB blood will nevertheless introduce
antibodies against both A and B antigens, as these are always
circulating in the type O blood plasma. This may cause problems for the
recipient, but because the volume of blood transfused is much lower than
the volume of the patient’s own blood, the adverse effects of the
relatively few infused plasma antibodies are typically limited. Rh
factor also plays a role. If Rh<sup>−</sup> individuals receiving blood
have had prior exposure to Rh antigen, antibodies for this antigen may
be present in the blood and trigger agglutination to some degree.
Although it is always preferable to cross match a patient’s blood before
transfusing, in a true life-threatening emergency situation, this is not
always possible, and these procedures may be implemented.
{: #fs-id2592026}

A patient with blood type AB<sup>+</sup> is known as the <span
data-type="term">universal recipient</span>. This patient can
theoretically receive any type of blood, because the patient’s own
blood—having both A and B antigens on the erythrocyte surface—does not
produce anti-A or anti-B antibodies. In addition, an Rh<sup>+</sup>
patient can receive both Rh<sup>+</sup> and Rh<sup>−</sup> blood.
However, keep in mind that the donor’s blood will contain circulating
antibodies, again with possible negative implications.
[\[link\]](#fig-ch19_06_03){: .autogenerated-content} summarizes the
blood types and compatibilities.
{: #fs-id2449664}

At the scene of multiple-vehicle accidents, military engagements, and
natural or human-caused disasters, many victims may suffer
simultaneously from acute hemorrhage, yet type O blood may not be
immediately available. In these circumstances, medics may at least try
to replace some of the volume of blood that has been lost. This is done
by intravenous administration of a saline solution that provides fluids
and electrolytes in proportions equivalent to those of normal blood
plasma. Research is ongoing to develop a safe and effective artificial
blood that would carry out the oxygen-carrying function of blood without
the RBCs, enabling transfusions in the field without concern for
incompatibility. These blood substitutes normally contain hemoglobin- as
well as perfluorocarbon-based oxygen carriers.
{: #fs-id2585008}

<figure id="fig-ch19_06_03">
<div data-type="title">
ABO Blood Group
</div>
<figcaption>
This chart summarizes the characteristics of the blood types in the ABO
blood group. See the text for more on the concept of a universal donor
or recipient.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id2643329" data-alt="This table shows the
different blood types, the antibodies in plasma, the antigens in the red
blood cell, and the blood compatible blood types in an emergency.">
![This table shows the different blood types, the antibodies in plasma,
the antigens in the red blood cell, and the blood compatible blood types
in an emergency.](../resources/1913_ABO_Blood_Groups.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="420"} </span>
</figure>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2696804" class="summary" markdown="1">
# Chapter Review
{: data-type="title"}

Antigens are nonself molecules, usually large proteins, which provoke an
immune response. In transfusion reactions, antibodies attach to antigens
on the surfaces of erythrocytes and cause agglutination and hemolysis.
ABO blood group antigens are designated A and B. People with type A
blood have A antigens on their erythrocytes, whereas those with type B
blood have B antigens. Those with AB blood have both A and B antigens,
and those with type O blood have neither A nor B antigens. The blood
plasma contains preformed antibodies against the antigens not present on
a person’s erythrocytes.
{: #fs-id2471150}

A second group of blood antigens is the Rh group, the most important of
which is Rh D. People with Rh<sup>−</sup> blood do not have this antigen
on their erythrocytes, whereas those who are Rh<sup>+</sup> do. About 85
percent of Americans are Rh<sup>+</sup>. When a woman who is
Rh<sup>−</sup> becomes pregnant with an Rh<sup>+</sup> fetus, her body
may begin to produce anti-Rh antibodies. If she subsequently becomes
pregnant with a second Rh<sup>+</sup> fetus and is not treated
preventively with RhoGAM, the fetus will be at risk for an
antigen-antibody reaction, including agglutination and hemolysis. This
is known as hemolytic disease of the newborn.
{: #fs-id2582234}

Cross matching to determine blood type is necessary before transfusing
blood, unless the patient is experiencing hemorrhage that is an
immediate threat to life, in which case type O<sup>−</sup> blood may be
transfused.
{: #fs-id2527455}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2137046" class="multiple-choice" markdown="1">
# Review Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2307982">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2414002" markdown="1">
The process in which antibodies attach to antigens, causing the
formation of masses of linked cells, is called ________.
{: #fs-id2588389}

1.  sensitization
2.  coagulation
3.  agglutination
4.  hemolysis
{: #fs-id2573568 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1548667" data-label="" markdown="1">
C
{: #fs-id2834019}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id1517312">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2442960" markdown="1">
People with ABO blood type O ________.
{: #fs-id2061794}

1.  have both antigens A and B on their erythrocytes
2.  lack both antigens A and B on their erythrocytes
3.  have neither anti-A nor anti-B antibodies circulating in their blood
    plasma
4.  are considered universal recipients
{: #fs-id2583430 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id1931352" data-label="" markdown="1">
B
{: #fs-id2823045}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2174184">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id1972856" markdown="1">
Hemolytic disease of the newborn is a risk during a subsequent pregnancy
in which ________.
{: #fs-id2180118}

1.  a type AB mother is carrying a type O fetus
2.  a type O mother is carrying a type AB fetus
3.  an Rh<sup>+</sup> mother is carrying an Rh<sup>−</sup> fetus
4.  an Rh<sup>−</sup> mother is carrying a second Rh<sup>+</sup> fetus
{: #fs-id2592707 data-number-style="lower-alpha"}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2001137" data-label="" markdown="1">
D
{: #fs-id2226022}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id1483057" class="free-response" markdown="1">
# Critical Thinking Questions
{: data-type="title"}

<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2363711">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2430611" markdown="1">
Following a motor vehicle accident, a patient is rushed to the emergency
department with multiple traumatic injuries, causing severe bleeding.
The patient’s condition is critical, and there is no time for
determining his blood type. What type of blood is transfused, and why?
{: #fs-id1432571}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2042200" data-label="" markdown="1">
In emergency situations, blood type O<sup>−</sup> will be infused until
cross matching can be done. Blood type O<sup>−</sup> is called the
universal donor blood because the erythrocytes have neither A nor B
antigens on their surface, and the Rh factor is negative.
{: #fs-id1644404}

</div>
</div>
<div data-type="exercise" id="fs-id2591033">
<div data-type="problem" id="fs-id2685848" markdown="1">
In preparation for a scheduled surgery, a patient visits the hospital
lab for a blood draw. The technician collects a blood sample and
performs a test to determine its type. She places a sample of the
patient’s blood in two wells. To the first well she adds anti-A
antibody. To the second she adds anti-B antibody. Both samples visibly
agglutinate. Has the technician made an error, or is this a normal
response? If normal, what blood type does this indicate?
{: #fs-id2336136}

</div>
<div data-type="solution" id="fs-id2062672" data-label="" markdown="1">
The lab technician has not made an error. Blood type AB has both A and B
surface antigens, and neither anti-A nor anti-B antibodies circulating
in the plasma. When anti-A antibodies (added to the first well) contact
A antigens on AB erythrocytes, they will cause agglutination. Similarly,
when anti-B antibodies contact B antigens on AB erythrocytes, they will
cause agglutination.
{: #fs-id2202186}

</div>
</div>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="fs-id2623272" class="references" markdown="1">
# References
{: data-type="title"}

American Red Cross (US). Blood types \[Internet\]. c2013 \[cited 2013
Apr 3\]. Available from:
[http://www.redcrossblood.org/learn-about-blood/blood-types][1] 2013
{: #fs-id1342543}

</section>




[1]: http://www.redcrossblood.org/learn-about-blood/blood-types

