---
title: Introduction
layout: page
---

<?cnx.eoc
  class="summary" title="Chapter Review"?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="interactive-exercise" title="Interactive Link Questions"?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="multiple-choice" title="Review Questions" ?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class="free-response" title="Critical Thinking Questions"?>

<?cnx.eoc
  class=&#8221;references&#8221; title=&#8221;References&#8221;?>

<figure id="fig-ch19_00_01" class="splash">
<div data-type="title">
Blood Cells
</div>
<figcaption>
A single drop of blood contains millions of red blood cells, white blood
cells, and platelets. One of each type is shown here, isolated from a
scanning electron micrograph.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="fs-id1380595" data-alt="This photo shows a
red blood cell and a white blood cell."> ![This photo shows a red blood
cell and a white blood cell.](../resources/1900_Blood_cells.jpg){:
data-media-type="image/jpg" width="550"} </span>
</figure>
<div data-type="note" id="fs-id1165589878292" class="chapter-objectives" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Chapter Objectives
</div>
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
{: #fs-id1165574197963}

* Identify the primary functions of blood, its fluid and cellular
  components, and its physical characteristics
* Identify the most important proteins and other solutes present in
  blood plasma
* Describe the formation of the formed element components of blood
* Discuss the structure and function of red blood cells and hemoglobin
* Classify and characterize white blood cells
* Describe the structure of platelets and explain the process of
  hemostasis
* Explain the significance of AB and Rh blood groups in blood
  transfusions
* Discuss a variety of blood disorders
{: #fs-id1165577060309}

</div>
Single-celled organisms do not need blood. They obtain nutrients
directly from and excrete wastes directly into their environment. The
human organism cannot do that. Our large, complex bodies need blood to
deliver nutrients to and remove wastes from our trillions of cells. The
heart pumps blood throughout the body in a network of blood vessels.
Together, these three components—blood, heart, and vessels—makes up the
cardiovascular system. This chapter focuses on the medium of transport:
blood.
{: #fs-id2156696}




