---
title: Preface
layout: page
---

<div data-type="abstract">
Human Anatomy and Physiology is designed for the two-semester anatomy
and physiology course taken by life science and allied health students.
The textbook follows the scope and sequence of most Human Anatomy and
Physiology courses, and its coverage and organization were informed by
hundreds of instructors who teach the course. Instructors can customize
the book, adapting it to the approach that works best in their
classroom. The artwork for this textbook is aimed focusing student
learning through a powerful blend of traditional depictions and
instructional innovations. Color is used sparingly, to emphasize the
most important aspects of any given illustration. Significant use of
micrographs from the University of Michigan complement the
illustrations, and provide the students with a meaningful alternate
depiction of each concept. Finally, enrichment elements provide
relevance and deeper context for students, particularly in the areas of
health, disease, and information relevant to their intended careers.
</div>
Welcome to *Human Anatomy and Physiology*{: data-effect="italics"}, an
OpenStax College resource. We created this textbook with several goals
in mind: accessibility, customization, and student engagement—helping
students reach high levels of academic scholarship. Instructors and
students alike will find that this textbook offers a thorough
introduction to the content in an accessible format.
{: #delete_me}

<section data-depth="1" id="eip-7" markdown="1">
# About OpenStax College
{: data-type="title"}

OpenStax College is a nonprofit organization committed to improving
student access to quality learning materials. Our free textbooks are
developed and peer-reviewed by educators to ensure that they are
readable, accurate, and organized in accordance with the scope and
sequence requirements of today’s college courses. Unlike traditional
textbooks, OpenStax College resources live online and are owned by the
community of educators using them. Through partnerships with companies
and foundations committed to reducing costs for students, we are working
to improve access to higher education for all. OpenStax College is an
initiative of Rice University and is made possible through the generous
support of several philanthropic foundations.
{: #eip-463}

</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="eip-374" markdown="1">
# About OpenStax College’s Resources
{: data-type="title"}

OpenStax College resources provide quality academic instruction. Three
key features set our materials apart from others: 1) They can be easily
customized by instructors for each class, 2) they are “living” resources
that grow online through contributions from science educators, and 3)
they are available for free or for a minimal cost.
{: #eip-0}

<section data-depth="2" id="eip-262" markdown="1">
## Customization
{: data-type="title"}

OpenStax College learning resources are conceived and written with
flexibility in mind so that they can be customized for each course. Our
textbooks provide a solid foundation on which instructors can build
their own texts. Instructors can select the sections that are most
relevant to their curricula and create a textbook that speaks directly
to the needs of their students. Instructors are encouraged to expand on
existing examples in the text by adding unique context via
geographically localized applications and topical connections.
{: #eip-362}

*Human Anatomy and Physiology*{: data-effect="italics"} can be easily
customized using our online platform
(https://openstaxcollege.org/textbooks/anatomy-and-physiology/adapt).
The text is arranged in a modular chapter format. Simply select the
content most relevant to your syllabus and create a textbook that
addresses the needs of your class. This customization feature will
ensure that your textbook reflects the goals of your course.
{: #eip-id1166206909033}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="eip-185" markdown="1">
## Curation
{: data-type="title"}

To broaden access and encourage community curation, *Human Anatomy and
Physiology*{: data-effect="italics"} is “open source” under a Creative
Commons Attribution (CC BY) license. Members of the scientific community
are invited to submit examples, emerging research, and other feedback to
enhance and strengthen the material, keeping it current and relevant for
today’s students. Submit your suggestions to info@openstaxcollege.org,
and check in on edition status, alternate versions, errata, and news on
the StaxDash at http://openstaxcollege.org.
{: #eip-155}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="eip-326" markdown="1">
## Cost
{: data-type="title"}

Our textbooks are available for free online, and in low-cost print and
tablet editions.
{: #eip-917}

</section>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="eip-394" markdown="1">
# About *Human Anatomy and Physiology*{: data-effect="italics"}
{: data-type="title"}

*Human Anatomy and Physiology*{: data-effect="italics"} is designed for
the two-semester anatomy and physiology course taken by life science and
allied health students. It supports effective teaching and learning, and
prepares students for further learning and future careers. The text
focuses on the most important concepts and aims to minimize distracting
students with more minor details.
{: #eip-625}

The development choices for this textbook were made with the guidance of
hundreds of faculty who are deeply involved in teaching this course.
These choices led to innovations in art, terminology, career
orientation, practical applications, and multimedia-based learning, all
with a goal of increasing relevance to students. We strove to make the
discipline meaningful and memorable to students, so that they can draw
from it a working knowledge that will enrich their future studies.
{: #eip-id1166207179754}

<section data-depth="2" id="eip-29" markdown="1">
## Coverage and Scope
{: data-type="title"}

The units of our *Human Anatomy and Physiology*{: data-effect="italics"}
textbook adhere to the scope and sequence followed by most two-semester
courses nationwide.
{: #eip-369}

<section data-depth="3" id="eip-217" markdown="1">
### Unit 1: Levels of Organization
{: data-type="title"}

Chapters 1–4 provide students with a basic understanding of human
anatomy and physiology, including its language, the levels of
organization, and the basics of chemistry and cell biology. These
chapters provide a foundation for the further study of the body. They
also focus particularly on how the body’s regions, important chemicals,
and cells maintain homeostasis.<div data-type="newline">

</div>

 Chapter 1 An Introduction to the Human Body<div data-type="newline">

</div>

 Chapter 2 The Chemical Level of Organization<div data-type="newline">

</div>

 Chapter 3 The Cellular Level of Organization<div data-type="newline">

</div>

 Chapter 4 The Tissue Level of Organization<div data-type="newline">

</div>
{: #eip-719}

</section>
<section data-depth="3" id="eip-146" markdown="1">
### Unit 2: Support and Movement
{: data-type="title"}

In Chapters 5–11, students explore the skin, the largest organ of the
body, and examine the body’s skeletal and muscular systems, following a
traditional sequence of topics. This unit is the first to walk students
through specific systems of the body, and as it does so, it maintains a
focus on homeostasis as well as those diseases and conditions that can
disrupt it.<div data-type="newline">

</div>

 Chapter 5 The Integumentary System<div data-type="newline">

</div>

 Chapter 6 Bone and Skeletal Tissue<div data-type="newline">

</div>

 Chapter 7 The Axial Skeleton<div data-type="newline">

</div>

 Chapter 8 The Appendicular Skeleton<div data-type="newline">

</div>

 Chapter 9 Joints<div data-type="newline">

</div>

 Chapter 10 Muscle Tissue<div data-type="newline">

</div>

 Chapter 11 The Muscular System<div data-type="newline">

</div>
{: #eip-760}

</section>
<section data-depth="3" id="eip-114" markdown="1">
### Unit 3: Regulation, Integration, and Control
{: data-type="title"}

Chapters 12–17 help students answer questions about nervous and
endocrine system control and regulation. In a break with the traditional
sequence of topics, the special senses are integrated into the chapter
on the somatic nervous system. The chapter on the neurological
examination offers students a unique approach to understanding nervous
system function using five simple but powerful diagnostic tests. <div
data-type="newline">

</div>

 Chapter 12 Introduction to the Nervous System<div data-type="newline">

</div>

 Chapter 13 The Anatomy of the Nervous System<div data-type="newline">

</div>

 Chapter 14 The Somatic Nervous System<div data-type="newline">

</div>

 Chapter 15 The Autonomic Nervous System<div data-type="newline">

</div>

 Chapter 16 The Neurological Exam<div data-type="newline">

</div>

 Chapter 17 The Endocrine System<div data-type="newline">

</div>
{: #eip-595}

</section>
<section data-depth="3" id="eip-942" markdown="1">
### Unit 5: Energy, Maintenance, and Environmental Exchange
{: data-type="title"}

In Chapters 22–26, students discover the interaction between body
systems and the outside environment for the exchange of materials, the
capture of energy, the release of waste, and the overall maintenance of
the internal systems that regulate the exchange. The explanations and
illustrations are particularly focused on how structure relates to
function. <div data-type="newline">

</div>

 Chapter 22 The Respiratory System<div data-type="newline">

</div>

 Chapter 23 The Digestive System<div data-type="newline">

</div>

 Chapter 24 Nutrition and Metabolism<div data-type="newline">

</div>

 Chapter 25 The Urinary System<div data-type="newline">

</div>

 Chapter 26 Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid–Base Balance<div
data-type="newline">

</div>
{: #eip-965}

</section>
<section data-depth="3" id="eip-314" markdown="1">
### Unit 6: Human Development and the Continuity of Life
{: data-type="title"}

The closing chapters examine the male and female reproductive systems,
describe the process of human development and the different stages of
pregnancy, and end with a review of the mechanisms of inheritance. <div
data-type="newline">

</div>

 Chapter 27 The Reproductive System<div data-type="newline">

</div>

 Chapter 28 Development and Genetic Inheritance<div data-type="newline">

</div>
{: #eip-145}

</section>
</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="eip-450" markdown="1">
## Pedagogical Foundation and Features
{: data-type="title"}

*Human Anatomy and Physiology*{: data-effect="italics"} is designed to
promote scientific literacy. Throughout the text, you will find features
that engage the students by taking selected topics a step further.
{: #eip-191}

* **Homeostatic Imbalances** discusses the effects and results of
  imbalances in the body.
* **Disorders** showcases a disorder that is relevant to the body system
  at hand. This feature may focus on a specific disorder, or a set of
  related disorders.
* **Diseases** showcases a disease that is relevant to the body system
  at hand.
* **Aging** explores the effect aging has on a body’s system and
  specific disorders that manifest over time.
* **Career Connections** presents information on the various careers
  often pursued by allied health students, such as medical technician,
  medical examiner, and neurophysiologist. Students are introduced to
  the educational requirements for and day-to-day responsibilities in
  these careers.
* **Everyday Connections** tie anatomical and physiological concepts to
  emerging issues and discuss these in terms of everyday life. Topics
  include “Anabolic Steroids” and “The Effect of Second-Hand Tobacco
  Smoke.”
* **Interactive Links** direct students to online exercises,
  simulations, animations, and videos to add a fuller context to core
  content and help improve understanding of the material. Many features
  include links to the University of Michigan’s interactive WebScopes,
  which allow students to zoom in on micrographs in the collection.
  These resources were vetted by reviewers and other subject matter
  experts to ensure that they are effective and accurate. We strongly
  urge students to explore these links, whether viewing a video or
  inputting data into a simulation, to gain the fullest experience and
  to learn how to search for information independently.
{: #eip-641}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="eip-72" markdown="1">
## Dynamic, Learner-Centered Art
{: data-type="title"}

Our unique approach to visuals is designed to emphasize only the
components most important in any given illustration. The art style is
particularly aimed at focusing student learning through a powerful blend
of traditional depictions and instructional innovations.
{: #eip-287}

Much of the art in this book consists of black line illustrations. The
strongest line is used to highlight the most important structures, and
shading is used to show dimension and shape. Color is used sparingly to
highlight and clarify the primary anatomical or functional point of the
illustration. This technique is intended to draw students’ attention to
the critical learning point in the illustration, without distraction
from excessive gradients, shadows, and highlights. Full color is used
when the structure or process requires it (for example, muscle diagrams
and cardiovascular system illustrations). <figure
id="eip-id1169396666468">
<span data-type="title">The Pharynx</span>
<figcaption>
By highlighting the most important portions of the illustration, the
artwork helps students focus on the most important points, without
overwhelming them.
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="preface" data-alt="A color illustration of
the pharynx."> ![A color illustration of the
pharynx.](../resources/Preface.png){: data-media-type="image/png"
width="300"} </span>
</figure>
{: #eip-id1167703115240}

<section data-depth="3" id="eip-817" markdown="1">
### Micrographs
{: data-type="title"}

Micrograph magnifications have been calculated based on the objective
provided with the image. If a micrograph was recorded at 40×, and the
image was magnified an additional 2×, we calculated the final
magnification of the micrograph to be 80×.
{: #eip-564}

Please note that, when viewing the textbook electronically, the
micrograph magnification provided in the text does not take into account
the size and magnification of the screen on your electronic device.
There may be some variation. <figure id="eip-id1164925497177">
<span data-type="title">Sebaceous Glands</span>
<figcaption>
These glands secrete oils that lubricate and protect the skin. LM × 400.
(Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical
School © 2012)
</figcaption>
<span markdown="1" data-type="media" id="preface2" data-alt="A color illustration of
the pharynx."> ![A color illustration of the
pharynx.](../resources/Preface2.png){: data-media-type="image/png"
width="500"} </span>
</figure>
{: #eip-id1166209684031}

</section>
<section data-depth="3" id="eip-921" markdown="1">
### Learning Resources
{: data-type="title"}

The following resources are (or will be) available in addition to main
text:
{: #eip-349}

* PowerPoint slides: For each chapter, the illustrations are presented,
  one per slide, with their respective captions.
* Pronunciation guide: A subset of the text’s key terms are presented
  with easy-to-follow phonetic transcriptions. For example, blastocyst
  is rendered as “blas\'to-sist”
{: #eip-57}

</section>
</section>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="eip-228" markdown="1">
# About Our Team
{: data-type="title"}

<section data-depth="2" id="eip-396" markdown="1">
## Senior Contributors
{: data-type="title"}

| J. Gordon Betts | Tyler Junior College |
| Peter Desaix | University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill |
| Eddie Johnson | Central Oregon Community College |
| Jody E. Johnson | Arapahoe Community College |
| Oksana Korol | Aims Community College |
| Dean Kruse | Portland Community College |
| Brandon Poe | Springfield Technical Community College |
| James A. Wise | Hampton University |
| Mark Womble | Youngstown State University |
| Kelly A. Young | California State University, Long Beach |
{: #eip-124 summary="List of senior contributors" data-frame="none" data-colsep="0" data-rowsep="0" data-label=""}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="eip-683" markdown="1">
## Advisor
{: data-type="title"}

Robin J. Heyden
{: #eip-195}

</section>
<section data-depth="2" id="eip-11" markdown="1">
## Other Contributors
{: data-type="title"}

| Kim Aaronson | Aquarius Institute; Triton College |
| Lopamudra Agarwal | Augusta Technical College |
| Gary Allen | Dalhousie University |
| Robert Allison | McLennan Community College |
| Heather Armbruster | Southern Union State Community College |
| Timothy Ballard | University of North Carolina Wilmington |
| Matthew Barlow | Eastern New Mexico University |
| William Blaker | Furman University |
| Julie Bowers | East Tennessee State University |
| Emily Bradshaw | Florida Southern College |
| Nishi Bryska | University of North Carolina, Charlotte |
| Susan Caley Opsal | Illinois Valley Community College |
| Boyd Campbell | Southwest College of Naturopathic Medicine and Health Sciences |
| Ann Caplea | Walsh University |
| Marnie Chapman | University of Alaska, Sitka |
| Barbara Christie-Pope | Cornell College |
| Kenneth Crane | Texarkana College |
| Maurice Culver | Florida State College at Jacksonville |
| Heather Cushman | Tacoma Community College |
| Noelle Cutter | Molloy College |
| Lynnette Danzl-Tauer | Rock Valley College |
| Jane Davis | Aurora University |
| AnnMarie DelliPizzi | Dominican College |
| Susan Dentel | Washtenaw Community College |
| Pamela Dobbins | Shelton State Community College |
| Patty Dolan | Pacific Lutheran University |
| Sondra Dubowsky | McLennan Community College |
| Peter Dukehart | Three Rivers Community College |
| Ellen DuPré | Central College |
| Elizabeth DuPriest | Warner Pacific College |
| Pam Elf | University of Minnesota |
| Sharon Ellerton | Queensborough Community College |
| Carla Endres | Utah State University - College of Eastern Utah: San Juan Campus |
| Myriam Feldman | Lake Washington Institute of Technology; Cascadia Community College |
| Greg Fitch | Avila University |
| Lynn Gargan | Tarant County College |
| Michael Giangrande | Oakland Community College |
| Chaya Gopalan | St. Louis College of Pharmacy |
| Victor Greco | Chattahoochee Technical College |
| Susanna Heinze | Skagit Valley College |
| Ann Henninger | Wartburg College |
| Dale Horeth | Tidewater Community College |
| Michael Hortsch | University of Michigan |
| Rosemary Hubbard | Marymount University |
| Mark Hubley | Prince George\'s Community College |
| Branko Jablanovic | College of Lake County |
| Norman Johnson | University of Massachusetts Amherst |
| Mark Jonasson | North Arkansas College |
| Jeff Keyte | College of Saint Mary |
| William Kleinelp | Middlesex County College |
| Leigh Kleinert | Grand Rapids Community College |
| Brenda Leady | University of Toledo |
| John Lepri | University of North Carolina, Greensboro |
| Sarah Leupen | University of Maryland, Baltimore County |
| Lihua Liang | Johns Hopkins University |
| Robert Mallet | University of North Texas Health Science Center |
| Bruce Maring | Daytona State College |
| Elisabeth Martin | College of Lake County |
| Natalie Maxwell | Carl Albert State College, Sallisaw |
| Julie May | William Carey University |
| Debra McLaughlin | University of Maryland University College |
| Nicholas Mitchell | St. Bonaventure University |
| Phillip Nicotera | St. Petersburg College |
| Mary Jane Niles | University of San Francisco |
| Ikemefuna Nwosu | Parkland College; Lake Land College |
| Betsy Ott | Tyler Junior College |
| Ivan Paul | John Wood Community College |
| Aaron Payette | College of Southern Nevada |
| Scott Payne | Kentucky Wesleyan College |
| Cameron Perkins | South Georgia College |
| David Pfeiffer | University of Alaska, Anchorage |
| Thomas Pilat | Illinois Central College |
| Eileen Preston | Tarrant County College |
| Mike Pyle | Olivet Nazarene University |
| Robert Rawding | Gannon University |
| Jason Schreer | State University of New York at Potsdam |
| Laird Sheldahl | Mt. Hood Community College |
| Brian Shmaefsky | Lone Star College System |
| Douglas Sizemore | Bevill State Community College |
| Susan Spencer | Mount Hood Community College |
| Cynthia Standley | University of Arizona |
| Robert Sullivan | Marist College |
| Eric Sun | Middle Georgia State College |
| Tom Swenson | Ithaca College |
| Kathleen Tallman | Azusa Pacific University |
| Rohinton Tarapore | University of Pennsylvania |
| Elizabeth Tattersall | Western Nevada College |
| Mark Thomas | University of Northern Colorado |
| Janis Thompson | Lorain County Community College |
| Rita Thrasher | Pensacola State College |
| David Van Wylen | St. Olaf College |
| Lynn Wandrey | Mott Community College |
| Margaret Weck | St. Louis College of Pharmacy |
| Kathleen Weiss | George Fox University |
| Neil Westergaard | Williston State College |
| David Wortham | West Georgia Technical College |
| Umesh Yadav | University of Texas Medical Branch |
| Tony Yates | Oklahoma Baptist University |
| Justin York | Glendale Community College |
| Cheri Zao | North Idaho College |
| Elena Zoubina | Bridgewater State University; Massasoit Community College |
{: #eip-237 summary="other contributors" data-frame="none" data-colsep="0" data-rowsep="0" data-label=""}

</section>
</section>
<section data-depth="1" id="eip-321" markdown="1">
# Special Thanks
{: data-type="title"}

OpenStax College wishes to thank the Regents of University of Michigan
Medical School for the use of their extensive micrograph collection.
Many of the UM micrographs that appear in *Human Anatomy and
Physiology*{: data-effect="italics"} are interactive WebScopes, which
students can explore by zooming in and out.
{: #eip-980}

We also wish to thank the Open Learning Initiative at Carnegie Mellon
University, with whom we shared and exchanged resources during the
development of *Human Anatomy and Physiology*{: data-effect="italics"}.
{: #eip-id1164912162747}

</section>



